  An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations  by Adam Smith   Contents     INTRODUCTION AND PLAN OF THE WORK.     BOOK I. OF THE CAUSES OF IMPROVEMENT IN THE PRODUCTIVE
POWERS OF LABOUR, AND OF THE ORDER ACCORDING TO WHICH ITS PRODUCE IS NATURALLY
DISTRIBUTED AMONG THE DIFFERENT RANKS OF THE PEOPLE.     CHAPTER I. OF THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.     CHAPTER II. OF THE PRINCIPLE WHICH GIVES OCCASION TO THE
DIVISION OF LABOUR.     CHAPTER III. THAT THE DIVISION OF LABOUR IS LIMITED BY
THE EXTENT OF THE MARKET.     CHAPTER IV. OF THE ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY.     CHAPTER V. OF THE REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE OF
COMMODITIES, OR OF THEIR PRICE IN LABOUR, AND THEIR PRICE IN MONEY.     CHAPTER VI. OF THE COMPONENT PART OF THE PRICE OF COMMODITIES.     CHAPTER VII. OF THE NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE OF COMMODITIES.     CHAPTER VIII. OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.     CHAPTER IX. OF THE PROFITS OF STOCK.     CHAPTER X. OF WAGES AND PROFIT IN THE DIFFERENT
EMPLOYMENTS OF LABOUR AND STOCK.     CHAPTER XI. OF THE RENT OF LAND.     BOOK II. OF THE NATURE, ACCUMULATION, AND
EMPLOYMENT OF STOCK.     CHAPTER I. OF THE DIVISION OF STOCK.     CHAPTER II. OF MONEY, CONSIDERED AS A PARTICULAR BRANCH
OF THE GENERAL STOCK OF THE SOCIETY, OR OF THE EXPENSE OF MAINTAINING THE
NATIONAL CAPITAL.     CHAPTER III. OF THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL, OR OF
PRODUCTIVE AND UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR.     CHAPTER IV. OF STOCK LENT AT INTEREST.     CHAPTER V. OF THE DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENTS OF
        CAPITALS.     BOOK III. OF THE DIFFERENT PROGRESS OF OPULENCE IN
DIFFERENT NATIONS     CHAPTER I. OF THE NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE.     CHAPTER II. OF THE DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN THE
ANCIENT STATE OF EUROPE, AFTER THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.     CHAPTER III. OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF CITIES AND
TOWNS, AFTER THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.     CHAPTER IV. HOW THE COMMERCE OF TOWNS CONTRIBUTED TO THE
IMPROVEMENT OF THE COUNTRY.     BOOK IV. OF SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.     CHAPTER I. OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE COMMERCIAL OR
MERCANTILE SYSTEM.     CHAPTER II. OF RESTRAINTS UPON IMPORTATION FROM FOREIGN
COUNTRIES OF SUCH GOODS AS CAN BE PRODUCED AT HOME.     CHAPTER III. OF THE EXTRAORDINARY RESTRAINTS UPON THE
IMPORTATION OF GOODS OF ALMOST ALL KINDS, FROM THOSE COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THE
BALANCE IS SUPPOSED TO BE DISADVANTAGEOUS.     CHAPTER IV. OF DRAWBACKS.     CHAPTER V. OF BOUNTIES.     CHAPTER VI. OF TREATIES OF COMMERCE.     CHAPTER VII. OF COLONIES.     CHAPTER VIII. CONCLUSION OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM.     CHAPTER IX. OF THE AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS, OR OF THOSE
SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY WHICH REPRESENT THE PRODUCE OF LAND, AS EITHER
THE SOLE OR THE PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF THE REVENUE AND WEALTH OF EVERY COUNTRY.     BOOK V. OF THE REVENUE OF THE SOVEREIGN OR COMMONWEALTH     CHAPTER I. OF THE EXPENSES OF THE SOVEREIGN OR COMMONWEALTH.     CHAPTER II. OF THE SOURCES OF THE GENERAL OR PUBLIC
REVENUE OF THE SOCIETY.     CHAPTER III. OF PUBLIC DEBTS.     INTRODUCTION AND PLAN OF THE WORK.  The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it
      with all the necessaries and conveniencies of life which it annually
      consumes, and which consist always either in the immediate produce of that
      labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from other nations.  According, therefore, as this produce, or what is purchased with it, bears
      a greater or smaller proportion to the number of those who are to consume
      it, the nation will be better or worse supplied with all the necessaries
      and conveniencies for which it has occasion.  But this proportion must in every nation be regulated by two different
      circumstances: first, by the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which its
      labour is generally applied; and, secondly, by the proportion between the
      number of those who are employed in useful labour, and that of those who
      are not so employed. Whatever be the soil, climate, or extent of territory
      of any particular nation, the abundance or scantiness of its annual supply
      must, in that particular situation, depend upon those two circumstances.  The abundance or scantiness of this supply, too, seems to depend more upon
      the former of those two circumstances than upon the latter. Among the
      savage nations of hunters and fishers, every individual who is able to
      work is more or less employed in useful labour, and endeavours to provide,
      as well as he can, the necessaries and conveniencies of life, for himself,
      and such of his family or tribe as are either too old, or too young, or
      too infirm, to go a-hunting and fishing. Such nations, however, are so
      miserably poor, that, from mere want, they are frequently reduced, or at
      least think themselves reduced, to the necessity sometimes of directly
      destroying, and sometimes of abandoning their infants, their old people,
      and those afflicted with lingering diseases, to perish with hunger, or to
      be devoured by wild beasts. Among civilized and thriving nations, on the
      contrary, though a great number of people do not labour at all, many of
      whom consume the produce of ten times, frequently of a hundred times, more
      labour than the greater part of those who work; yet the produce of the
      whole labour of the society is so great, that all are often abundantly
      supplied; and a workman, even of the lowest and poorest order, if he is
      frugal and industrious, may enjoy a greater share of the necessaries and
      conveniencies of life than it is possible for any savage to acquire.  The causes of this improvement in the productive powers of labour, and the
      order according to which its produce is naturally distributed among the
      different ranks and conditions of men in the society, make the subject of
      the first book of this Inquiry.  Whatever be the actual state of the skill, dexterity, and judgment, with
      which labour is applied in any nation, the abundance or scantiness of its
      annual supply must depend, during the continuance of that state, upon the
      proportion between the number of those who are annually employed in useful
      labour, and that of those who are not so employed. The number of useful
      and productive labourers, it will hereafter appear, is everywhere in
      proportion to the quantity of capital stock which is employed in setting
      them to work, and to the particular way in which it is so employed. The
      second book, therefore, treats of the nature of capital stock, of the
      manner in which it is gradually accumulated, and of the different
      quantities of labour which it puts into motion, according to the different
      ways in which it is employed.  Nations tolerably well advanced as to skill, dexterity, and judgment, in
      the application of labour, have followed very different plans in the
      general conduct or direction of it; and those plans have not all been
      equally favourable to the greatness of its produce. The policy of some
      nations has given extraordinary encouragement to the industry of the
      country; that of others to the industry of towns. Scarce any nation has
      dealt equally and impartially with every sort of industry. Since the
      down-fall of the Roman empire, the policy of Europe has been more
      favourable to arts, manufactures, and commerce, the industry of towns,
      than to agriculture, the Industry of the country. The circumstances which
      seem to have introduced and established this policy are explained in the
      third book.  Though those different plans were, perhaps, first introduced by the
      private interests and prejudices of particular orders of men, without any
      regard to, or foresight of, their consequences upon the general welfare of
      the society; yet they have given occasion to very different theories of
      political economy; of which some magnify the importance of that industry
      which is carried on in towns, others of that which is carried on in the
      country. Those theories have had a considerable influence, not only upon
      the opinions of men of learning, but upon the public conduct of princes
      and sovereign states. I have endeavoured, in the fourth book, to explain
      as fully and distinctly as I can those different theories, and the
      principal effects which they have produced in different ages and nations.  To explain in what has consisted the revenue of the great body of the
      people, or what has been the nature of those funds, which, in different
      ages and nations, have supplied their annual consumption, is the object of
      these four first books. The fifth and last book treats of the revenue of
      the sovereign, or commonwealth. In this book I have endeavoured to shew,
      first, what are the necessary expenses of the sovereign, or commonwealth;
      which of those expenses ought to be defrayed by the general contribution
      of the whole society, and which of them, by that of some particular part
      only, or of some particular members of it: secondly, what are the
      different methods in which the whole society may be made to contribute
      towards defraying the expenses incumbent on the whole society, and what
      are the principal advantages and inconveniencies of each of those methods;
      and, thirdly and lastly, what are the reasons and causes which have
      induced almost all modern governments to mortgage some part of this
      revenue, or to contract debts; and what have been the effects of those
      debts upon the real wealth, the annual produce of the land and labour of
      the society.    BOOK I. OF THE CAUSES OF IMPROVEMENT IN THE
PRODUCTIVE POWERS OF LABOUR, AND OF THE ORDER ACCORDING TO WHICH ITS PRODUCE IS
NATURALLY DISTRIBUTED AMONG THE DIFFERENT RANKS OF THE PEOPLE.    CHAPTER I. OF THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.  The greatest improvements in the productive powers of labour, and the
      greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment, with which it is
      anywhere directed, or applied, seem to have been the effects of the
      division of labour. The effects of the division of labour, in the general
      business of society, will be more easily understood, by considering in
      what manner it operates in some particular manufactures. It is commonly
      supposed to be carried furthest in some very trifling ones; not perhaps
      that it really is carried further in them than in others of more
      importance: but in those trifling manufactures which are destined to
      supply the small wants of but a small number of people, the whole number
      of workmen must necessarily be small; and those employed in every
      different branch of the work can often be collected into the same
      workhouse, and placed at once under the view of the spectator.  In those great manufactures, on the contrary, which are destined to supply
      the great wants of the great body of the people, every different branch of
      the work employs so great a number of workmen, that it is impossible to
      collect them all into the same workhouse. We can seldom see more, at one
      time, than those employed in one single branch. Though in such
      manufactures, therefore, the work may really be divided into a much
      greater number of parts, than in those of a more trifling nature, the
      division is not near so obvious, and has accordingly been much less
      observed.  To take an example, therefore, from a very trifling manufacture, but one
      in which the division of labour has been very often taken notice of, the
      trade of a pin-maker: a workman not educated to this business (which the
      division of labour has rendered a distinct trade), nor acquainted with the
      use of the machinery employed in it (to the invention of which the same
      division of labour has probably given occasion), could scarce, perhaps,
      with his utmost industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not
      make twenty. But in the way in which this business is now carried on, not
      only the whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is divided into a number
      of branches, of which the greater part are likewise peculiar trades. One
      man draws out the wire; another straights it; a third cuts it; a fourth
      points it; a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make
      the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on is a
      peculiar business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by
      itself to put them into the paper; and the important business of making a
      pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations,
      which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands, though
      in others the same man will sometimes perform two or three of them. I have
      seen a small manufactory of this kind, where ten men only were employed,
      and where some of them consequently performed two or three distinct
      operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but
      indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when
      they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a
      day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a middling
      size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of
      forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth
      part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four
      thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought
      separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated
      to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made
      twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day; that is, certainly, not the two
      hundred and fortieth, perhaps not the four thousand eight hundredth, part
      of what they are at present capable of performing, in consequence of a
      proper division and combination of their different operations.  In every other art and manufacture, the effects of the division of labour
      are similar to what they are in this very trifling one, though, in many of
      them, the labour can neither be so much subdivided, nor reduced to so
      great a simplicity of operation. The division of labour, however, so far
      as it can be introduced, occasions, in every art, a proportionable
      increase of the productive powers of labour. The separation of different
      trades and employments from one another, seems to have taken place in
      consequence of this advantage. This separation, too, is generally carried
      furthest in those countries which enjoy the highest degree of industry and
      improvement; what is the work of one man, in a rude state of society,
      being generally that of several in an improved one. In every improved
      society, the farmer is generally nothing but a farmer; the manufacturer,
      nothing but a manufacturer. The labour, too, which is necessary to produce
      any one complete manufacture, is almost always divided among a great
      number of hands. How many different trades are employed in each branch of
      the linen and woollen manufactures, from the growers of the flax and the
      wool, to the bleachers and smoothers of the linen, or to the dyers and
      dressers of the cloth! The nature of agriculture, indeed, does not admit
      of so many subdivisions of labour, nor of so complete a separation of one
      business from another, as manufactures. It is impossible to separate so
      entirely the business of the grazier from that of the corn-farmer, as the
      trade of the carpenter is commonly separated from that of the smith. The
      spinner is almost always a distinct person from the weaver; but the
      ploughman, the harrower, the sower of the seed, and the reaper of the
      corn, are often the same. The occasions for those different sorts of
      labour returning with the different seasons of the year, it is impossible
      that one man should be constantly employed in any one of them. This
      impossibility of making so complete and entire a separation of all the
      different branches of labour employed in agriculture, is perhaps the
      reason why the improvement of the productive powers of labour, in this
      art, does not always keep pace with their improvement in manufactures. The
      most opulent nations, indeed, generally excel all their neighbours in
      agriculture as well as in manufactures; but they are commonly more
      distinguished by their superiority in the latter than in the former. Their
      lands are in general better cultivated, and having more labour and expense
      bestowed upon them, produce more in proportion to the extent and natural
      fertility of the ground. But this superiority of produce is seldom much
      more than in proportion to the superiority of labour and expense. In
      agriculture, the labour of the rich country is not always much more
      productive than that of the poor; or, at least, it is never so much more
      productive, as it commonly is in manufactures. The corn of the rich
      country, therefore, will not always, in the same degree of goodness, come
      cheaper to market than that of the poor. The corn of Poland, in the same
      degree of goodness, is as cheap as that of France, notwithstanding the
      superior opulence and improvement of the latter country. The corn of
      France is, in the corn-provinces, fully as good, and in most years nearly
      about the same price with the corn of England, though, in opulence and
      improvement, France is perhaps inferior to England. The corn-lands of
      England, however, are better cultivated than those of France, and the
      corn-lands of France are said to be much better cultivated than those of
      Poland. But though the poor country, notwithstanding the inferiority of
      its cultivation, can, in some measure, rival the rich in the cheapness and
      goodness of its corn, it can pretend to no such competition in its
      manufactures, at least if those manufactures suit the soil, climate, and
      situation, of the rich country. The silks of France are better and cheaper
      than those of England, because the silk manufacture, at least under the
      present high duties upon the importation of raw silk, does not so well
      suit the climate of England as that of France. But the hardware and the
      coarse woollens of England are beyond all comparison superior to those of
      France, and much cheaper, too, in the same degree of goodness. In Poland
      there are said to be scarce any manufactures of any kind, a few of those
      coarser household manufactures excepted, without which no country can well
      subsist.  This great increase in the quantity of work, which, in consequence of the
      division of labour, the same number of people are capable of performing,
      is owing to three different circumstances; first, to the increase of
      dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, to the saving of the time
      which is commonly lost in passing from one species of work to another;
      and, lastly, to the invention of a great number of machines which
      facilitate and abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.  First, the improvement of the dexterity of the workmen, necessarily
      increases the quantity of the work he can perform; and the division of
      labour, by reducing every man’s business to some one simple operation, and
      by making this operation the sole employment of his life, necessarily
      increases very much the dexterity of the workman. A common smith, who,
      though accustomed to handle the hammer, has never been used to make nails,
      if, upon some particular occasion, he is obliged to attempt it, will
      scarce, I am assured, be able to make above two or three hundred nails in
      a day, and those, too, very bad ones. A smith who has been accustomed to
      make nails, but whose sole or principal business has not been that of a
      nailer, can seldom, with his utmost diligence, make more than eight
      hundred or a thousand nails in a day. I have seen several boys, under
      twenty years of age, who had never exercised any other trade but that of
      making nails, and who, when they exerted themselves, could make, each of
      them, upwards of two thousand three hundred nails in a day. The making of
      a nail, however, is by no means one of the simplest operations. The same
      person blows the bellows, stirs or mends the fire as there is occasion,
      heats the iron, and forges every part of the nail: in forging the head,
      too, he is obliged to change his tools. The different operations into
      which the making of a pin, or of a metal button, is subdivided, are all of
      them much more simple, and the dexterity of the person, of whose life it
      has been the sole business to perform them, is usually much greater. The
      rapidity with which some of the operations of those manufactures are
      performed, exceeds what the human hand could, by those who had never seen
      them, be supposed capable of acquiring.  Secondly, the advantage which is gained by saving the time commonly lost
      in passing from one sort of work to another, is much greater than we
      should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is impossible to pass very
      quickly from one kind of work to another, that is carried on in a
      different place, and with quite different tools. A country weaver, who
      cultivates a small farm, must lose a good deal of time in passing from
      his loom to the field, and from the field to his loom. When the two trades
      can be carried on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is, no doubt,
      much less. It is, even in this case, however, very considerable. A man
      commonly saunters a little in turning his hand from one sort of employment
      to another. When he first begins the new work, he is seldom very keen and
      hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for some time he
      rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit of sauntering, and
      of indolent careless application, which is naturally, or rather
      necessarily, acquired by every country workman who is obliged to change
      his work and his tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in twenty
      different ways almost every day of his life, renders him almost always
      slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application, even on the
      most pressing occasions. Independent, therefore, of his deficiency in
      point of dexterity, this cause alone must always reduce considerably the
      quantity of work which he is capable of performing.  Thirdly, and lastly, everybody must be sensible how much labour is
      facilitated and abridged by the application of proper machinery. It is
      unnecessary to give any example. I shall only observe, therefore, that the
      invention of all those machines by which labour is so much facilitated and
      abridged, seems to have been originally owing to the division of labour.
      Men are much more likely to discover easier and readier methods of
      attaining any object, when the whole attention of their minds is directed
      towards that single object, than when it is dissipated among a great
      variety of things. But, in consequence of the division of labour, the
      whole of every man’s attention comes naturally to be directed towards some
      one very simple object. It is naturally to be expected, therefore, that
      some one or other of those who are employed in each particular branch of
      labour should soon find out easier and readier methods of performing their
      own particular work, whenever the nature of it admits of such improvement.
      A great part of the machines made use of in those manufactures in which
      labour is most subdivided, were originally the invention of common
      workmen, who, being each of them employed in some very simple operation,
      naturally turned their thoughts towards finding out easier and readier
      methods of performing it. Whoever has been much accustomed to visit such
      manufactures, must frequently have been shewn very pretty machines, which
      were the inventions of such workmen, in order to facilitate and quicken
      their own particular part of the work. In the first fire engines {this was
      the current designation for steam engines}, a boy was constantly employed
      to open and shut alternately the communication between the boiler and the
      cylinder, according as the piston either ascended or descended. One of
      those boys, who loved to play with his companions, observed that, by tying
      a string from the handle of the valve which opened this communication to
      another part of the machine, the valve would open and shut without his
      assistance, and leave him at liberty to divert himself with his
      play-fellows. One of the greatest improvements that has been made upon
      this machine, since it was first invented, was in this manner the
      discovery of a boy who wanted to save his own labour.  All the improvements in machinery, however, have by no means been the
      inventions of those who had occasion to use the machines. Many
      improvements have been made by the ingenuity of the makers of the
      machines, when to make them became the business of a peculiar trade; and
      some by that of those who are called philosophers, or men of speculation,
      whose trade it is not to do any thing, but to observe every thing, and
      who, upon that account, are often capable of combining together the powers
      of the most distant and dissimilar objects in the progress of society,
      philosophy or speculation becomes, like every other employment, the
      principal or sole trade and occupation of a particular class of citizens.
      Like every other employment, too, it is subdivided into a great number of
      different branches, each of which affords occupation to a peculiar tribe
      or class of philosophers; and this subdivision of employment in
      philosophy, as well as in every other business, improves dexterity, and
      saves time. Each individual becomes more expert in his own peculiar
      branch, more work is done upon the whole, and the quantity of science is
      considerably increased by it.  It is the great multiplication of the productions of all the different
      arts, in consequence of the division of labour, which occasions, in a
      well-governed society, that universal opulence which extends itself to the
      lowest ranks of the people. Every workman has a great quantity of his own
      work to dispose of beyond what he himself has occasion for; and every
      other workman being exactly in the same situation, he is enabled to
      exchange a great quantity of his own goods for a great quantity or, what
      comes to the same thing, for the price of a great quantity of theirs. He
      supplies them abundantly with what they have occasion for, and they
      accommodate him as amply with what he has occasion for, and a general
      plenty diffuses itself through all the different ranks of the society.  Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or daylabourer in a
      civilized and thriving country, and you will perceive that the number of
      people, of whose industry a part, though but a small part, has been
      employed in procuring him this accommodation, exceeds all computation. The
      woollen coat, for example, which covers the day-labourer, as coarse and
      rough as it may appear, is the produce of the joint labour of a great
      multitude of workmen. The shepherd, the sorter of the wool, the
      wool-comber or carder, the dyer, the scribbler, the spinner, the weaver,
      the fuller, the dresser, with many others, must all join their different
      arts in order to complete even this homely production. How many merchants
      and carriers, besides, must have been employed in transporting the
      materials from some of those workmen to others who often live in a very
      distant part of the country? How much commerce and navigation in
      particular, how many ship-builders, sailors, sail-makers, rope-makers,
      must have been employed in order to bring together the different drugs
      made use of by the dyer, which often come from the remotest corners of the
      world? What a variety of labour, too, is necessary in order to produce the
      tools of the meanest of those workmen! To say nothing of such complicated
      machines as the ship of the sailor, the mill of the fuller, or even the
      loom of the weaver, let us consider only what a variety of labour is
      requisite in order to form that very simple machine, the shears with which
      the shepherd clips the wool. The miner, the builder of the furnace for
      smelting the ore, the feller of the timber, the burner of the charcoal to
      be made use of in the smelting-house, the brickmaker, the bricklayer, the
      workmen who attend the furnace, the millwright, the forger, the smith,
      must all of them join their different arts in order to produce them. Were
      we to examine, in the same manner, all the different parts of his dress
      and household furniture, the coarse linen shirt which he wears next his
      skin, the shoes which cover his feet, the bed which he lies on, and all
      the different parts which compose it, the kitchen-grate at which he
      prepares his victuals, the coals which he makes use of for that purpose,
      dug from the bowels of the earth, and brought to him, perhaps, by a long
      sea and a long land-carriage, all the other utensils of his kitchen, all
      the furniture of his table, the knives and forks, the earthen or pewter
      plates upon which he serves up and divides his victuals, the different
      hands employed in preparing his bread and his beer, the glass window which
      lets in the heat and the light, and keeps out the wind and the rain, with
      all the knowledge and art requisite for preparing that beautiful and happy
      invention, without which these northern parts of the world could scarce
      have afforded a very comfortable habitation, together with the tools of
      all the different workmen employed in producing those different
      conveniencies; if we examine, I say, all these things, and consider what a
      variety of labour is employed about each of them, we shall be sensible
      that, without the assistance and co-operation of many thousands, the very
      meanest person in a civilized country could not be provided, even
      according to, what we very falsely imagine, the easy and simple manner in
      which he is commonly accommodated. Compared, indeed, with the more
      extravagant luxury of the great, his accommodation must no doubt appear
      extremely simple and easy; and yet it may be true, perhaps, that the
      accommodation of an European prince does not always so much exceed that of
      an industrious and frugal peasant, as the accommodation of the latter
      exceeds that of many an African king, the absolute masters of the lives
      and liberties of ten thousand naked savages.    CHAPTER II. OF THE PRINCIPLE WHICH GIVES OCCASION
TO THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.  This division of labour, from which so many advantages are derived, is not
      originally the effect of any human wisdom, which foresees and intends that
      general opulence to which it gives occasion. It is the necessary, though
      very slow and gradual, consequence of a certain propensity in human
      nature, which has in view no such extensive utility; the propensity to
      truck, barter, and exchange one thing for another.  Whether this propensity be one of those original principles in human
      nature, of which no further account can be given, or whether, as seems
      more probable, it be the necessary consequence of the faculties of reason
      and speech, it belongs not to our present subject to inquire. It is common
      to all men, and to be found in no other race of animals, which seem to
      know neither this nor any other species of contracts. Two greyhounds, in
      running down the same hare, have sometimes the appearance of acting in
      some sort of concert. Each turns her towards his companion, or endeavours
      to intercept her when his companion turns her towards himself. This,
      however, is not the effect of any contract, but of the accidental
      concurrence of their passions in the same object at that particular time.
      Nobody ever saw a dog make a fair and deliberate exchange of one bone for
      another with another dog. Nobody ever saw one animal, by its gestures and
      natural cries signify to another, this is mine, that yours; I am willing
      to give this for that. When an animal wants to obtain something either of
      a man, or of another animal, it has no other means of persuasion, but to
      gain the favour of those whose service it requires. A puppy fawns upon its
      dam, and a spaniel endeavours, by a thousand attractions, to engage the
      attention of its master who is at dinner, when it wants to be fed by him.
      Man sometimes uses the same arts with his brethren, and when he has no
      other means of engaging them to act according to his inclinations,
      endeavours by every servile and fawning attention to obtain their good
      will. He has not time, however, to do this upon every occasion. In
      civilized society he stands at all times in need of the co-operation and
      assistance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient
      to gain the friendship of a few persons. In almost every other race of
      animals, each individual, when it is grown up to maturity, is entirely
      independent, and in its natural state has occasion for the assistance of
      no other living creature. But man has almost constant occasion for the
      help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it from their
      benevolence only. He will be more likely to prevail if he can interest
      their self-love in his favour, and shew them that it is for their own
      advantage to do for him what he requires of them. Whoever offers to
      another a bargain of any kind, proposes to do this. Give me that which I
      want, and you shall have this which you want, is the meaning of every such
      offer; and it is in this manner that we obtain from one another the far
      greater part of those good offices which we stand in need of. It is not
      from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we
      expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address
      ourselves, not to their humanity, but to their self-love, and never talk
      to them of our own necessities, but of their advantages. Nobody but a
      beggar chooses to depend chiefly upon the benevolence of his
      fellow-citizens. Even a beggar does not depend upon it entirely. The
      charity of well-disposed people, indeed, supplies him with the whole fund
      of his subsistence. But though this principle ultimately provides him with
      all the necessaries of life which he has occasion for, it neither does nor
      can provide him with them as he has occasion for them. The greater part of
      his occasional wants are supplied in the same manner as those of other
      people, by treaty, by barter, and by purchase. With the money which one
      man gives him he purchases food. The old clothes which another bestows
      upon him he exchanges for other clothes which suit him better, or for
      lodging, or for food, or for money, with which he can buy either food,
      clothes, or lodging, as he has occasion.  As it is by treaty, by barter, and by purchase, that we obtain from one
      another the greater part of those mutual good offices which we stand in
      need of, so it is this same trucking disposition which originally gives
      occasion to the division of labour. In a tribe of hunters or shepherds, a
      particular person makes bows and arrows, for example, with more readiness
      and dexterity than any other. He frequently exchanges them for cattle or
      for venison, with his companions; and he finds at last that he can, in
      this manner, get more cattle and venison, than if he himself went to the
      field to catch them. From a regard to his own interest, therefore, the
      making of bows and arrows grows to be his chief business, and he becomes a
      sort of armourer. Another excels in making the frames and covers of their
      little huts or moveable houses. He is accustomed to be of use in this way
      to his neighbours, who reward him in the same manner with cattle and with
      venison, till at last he finds it his interest to dedicate himself
      entirely to this employment, and to become a sort of house-carpenter. In
      the same manner a third becomes a smith or a brazier; a fourth, a tanner
      or dresser of hides or skins, the principal part of the clothing of
      savages. And thus the certainty of being able to exchange all that surplus
      part of the produce of his own labour, which is over and above his own
      consumption, for such parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he may
      have occasion for, encourages every man to apply himself to a particular
      occupation, and to cultivate and bring to perfection whatever talent of
      genius he may possess for that particular species of business.  The difference of natural talents in different men, is, in reality, much
      less than we are aware of; and the very different genius which appears to
      distinguish men of different professions, when grown up to maturity, is
      not upon many occasions so much the cause, as the effect of the division
      of labour. The difference between the most dissimilar characters, between
      a philosopher and a common street porter, for example, seems to arise not
      so much from nature, as from habit, custom, and education. When they came
      in to the world, and for the first six or eight years of their existence,
      they were, perhaps, very much alike, and neither their parents nor
      play-fellows could perceive any remarkable difference. About that age, or
      soon after, they come to be employed in very different occupations. The
      difference of talents comes then to be taken notice of, and widens by
      degrees, till at last the vanity of the philosopher is willing to
      acknowledge scarce any resemblance. But without the disposition to truck,
      barter, and exchange, every man must have procured to himself every
      necessary and conveniency of life which he wanted. All must have had the
      same duties to perform, and the same work to do, and there could have been
      no such difference of employment as could alone give occasion to any great
      difference of talents.  As it is this disposition which forms that difference of talents, so
      remarkable among men of different professions, so it is this same
      disposition which renders that difference useful. Many tribes of animals,
      acknowledged to be all of the same species, derive from nature a much more
      remarkable distinction of genius, than what, antecedent to custom and
      education, appears to take place among men. By nature a philosopher is not
      in genius and disposition half so different from a street porter, as a
      mastiff is from a grey-hound, or a grey-hound from a spaniel, or this last
      from a shepherd’s dog. Those different tribes of animals, however, though
      all of the same species are of scarce any use to one another. The strength
      of the mastiff is not in the least supported either by the swiftness of
      the greyhound, or by the sagacity of the spaniel, or by the docility of
      the shepherd’s dog. The effects of those different geniuses and talents,
      for want of the power or disposition to barter and exchange, cannot be
      brought into a common stock, and do not in the least contribute to the
      better accommodation and conveniency of the species. Each animal is still
      obliged to support and defend itself, separately and independently, and
      derives no sort of advantage from that variety of talents with which
      nature has distinguished its fellows. Among men, on the contrary, the most
      dissimilar geniuses are of use to one another; the different produces of
      their respective talents, by the general disposition to truck, barter, and
      exchange, being brought, as it were, into a common stock, where every man
      may purchase whatever part of the produce of other men’s talents he has
      occasion for.    CHAPTER III. THAT THE DIVISION OF LABOUR IS
LIMITED BY THE EXTENT OF THE MARKET.  As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of
      labour, so the extent of this division must always be limited by the
      extent of that power, or, in other words, by the extent of the market.
      When the market is very small, no person can have any encouragement to
      dedicate himself entirely to one employment, for want of the power to
      exchange all that surplus part of the produce of his own labour, which is
      over and above his own consumption, for such parts of the produce of other
      men’s labour as he has occasion for.  There are some sorts of industry, even of the lowest kind, which can be
      carried on nowhere but in a great town. A porter, for example, can find
      employment and subsistence in no other place. A village is by much too
      narrow a sphere for him; even an ordinary market-town is scarce large
      enough to afford him constant occupation. In the lone houses and very
      small villages which are scattered about in so desert a country as the
      highlands of Scotland, every farmer must be butcher, baker, and brewer,
      for his own family. In such situations we can scarce expect to find even a
      smith, a carpenter, or a mason, within less than twenty miles of another
      of the same trade. The scattered families that live at eight or ten miles
      distance from the nearest of them, must learn to perform themselves a
      great number of little pieces of work, for which, in more populous
      countries, they would call in the assistance of those workmen. Country
      workmen are almost everywhere obliged to apply themselves to all the
      different branches of industry that have so much affinity to one another
      as to be employed about the same sort of materials. A country carpenter
      deals in every sort of work that is made of wood; a country smith in every
      sort of work that is made of iron. The former is not only a carpenter, but
      a joiner, a cabinet-maker, and even a carver in wood, as well as a
      wheel-wright, a plough-wright, a cart and waggon-maker. The employments of
      the latter are still more various. It is impossible there should be such a
      trade as even that of a nailer in the remote and inland parts of the
      highlands of Scotland. Such a workman at the rate of a thousand nails
      a-day, and three hundred working days in the year, will make three hundred
      thousand nails in the year. But in such a situation it would be impossible
      to dispose of one thousand, that is, of one day’s work in the year. As by
      means of water-carriage, a more extensive market is opened to every sort
      of industry than what land-carriage alone can afford it, so it is upon the
      sea-coast, and along the banks of navigable rivers, that industry of every
      kind naturally begins to subdivide and improve itself, and it is
      frequently not till a long time after that those improvements extend
      themselves to the inland parts of the country. A broad-wheeled waggon,
      attended by two men, and drawn by eight horses, in about six weeks time,
      carries and brings back between London and Edinburgh near four ton weight
      of goods. In about the same time a ship navigated by six or eight men, and
      sailing between the ports of London and Leith, frequently carries and
      brings back two hundred ton weight of goods. Six or eight men, therefore,
      by the help of water-carriage, can carry and bring back, in the same time,
      the same quantity of goods between London and Edinburgh as fifty
      broad-wheeled waggons, attended by a hundred men, and drawn by four
      hundred horses. Upon two hundred tons of goods, therefore, carried by the
      cheapest land-carriage from London to Edinburgh, there must be charged the
      maintenance of a hundred men for three weeks, and both the maintenance and
      what is nearly equal to maintenance the wear and tear of four hundred
      horses, as well as of fifty great waggons. Whereas, upon the same quantity
      of goods carried by water, there is to be charged only the maintenance of
      six or eight men, and the wear and tear of a ship of two hundred tons
      burthen, together with the value of the superior risk, or the difference
      of the insurance between land and water-carriage. Were there no other
      communication between those two places, therefore, but by land-carriage,
      as no goods could be transported from the one to the other, except such
      whose price was very considerable in proportion to their weight, they
      could carry on but a small part of that commerce which at present subsists
      between them, and consequently could give but a small part of that
      encouragement which they at present mutually afford to each other’s
      industry. There could be little or no commerce of any kind between the
      distant parts of the world. What goods could bear the expense of
      land-carriage between London and Calcutta? Or if there were any so
      precious as to be able to support this expense, with what safety could
      they be transported through the territories of so many barbarous nations?
      Those two cities, however, at present carry on a very considerable
      commerce with each other, and by mutually affording a market, give a good
      deal of encouragement to each other’s industry.  Since such, therefore, are the advantages of water-carriage, it is natural
      that the first improvements of art and industry should be made where this
      conveniency opens the whole world for a market to the produce of every
      sort of labour, and that they should always be much later in extending
      themselves into the inland parts of the country. The inland parts of the
      country can for a long time have no other market for the greater part of
      their goods, but the country which lies round about them, and separates
      them from the sea-coast, and the great navigable rivers. The extent of the
      market, therefore, must for a long time be in proportion to the riches and
      populousness of that country, and consequently their improvement must
      always be posterior to the improvement of that country. In our North
      American colonies, the plantations have constantly followed either the
      sea-coast or the banks of the navigable rivers, and have scarce anywhere
      extended themselves to any considerable distance from both.  The nations that, according to the best authenticated history, appear to
      have been first civilized, were those that dwelt round the coast of the
      Mediterranean sea. That sea, by far the greatest inlet that is known in
      the world, having no tides, nor consequently any waves, except such as are
      caused by the wind only, was, by the smoothness of its surface, as well as
      by the multitude of its islands, and the proximity of its neighbouring
      shores, extremely favourable to the infant navigation of the world; when,
      from their ignorance of the compass, men were afraid to quit the view of
      the coast, and from the imperfection of the art of ship-building, to
      abandon themselves to the boisterous waves of the ocean. To pass beyond
      the pillars of Hercules, that is, to sail out of the straits of Gibraltar,
      was, in the ancient world, long considered as a most wonderful and
      dangerous exploit of navigation. It was late before even the Phoenicians
      and Carthaginians, the most skilful navigators and ship-builders of those
      old times, attempted it; and they were, for a long time, the only nations
      that did attempt it.  Of all the countries on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, Egypt seems to
      have been the first in which either agriculture or manufactures were
      cultivated and improved to any considerable degree. Upper Egypt extends
      itself nowhere above a few miles from the Nile; and in Lower Egypt, that
      great river breaks itself into many different canals, which, with the
      assistance of a little art, seem to have afforded a communication by
      water-carriage, not only between all the great towns, but between all the
      considerable villages, and even to many farm-houses in the country, nearly
      in the same manner as the Rhine and the Maese do in Holland at present.
      The extent and easiness of this inland navigation was probably one of the
      principal causes of the early improvement of Egypt.  The improvements in agriculture and manufactures seem likewise to have
      been of very great antiquity in the provinces of Bengal, in the East
      Indies, and in some of the eastern provinces of China, though the great
      extent of this antiquity is not authenticated by any histories of whose
      authority we, in this part of the world, are well assured. In Bengal, the
      Ganges, and several other great rivers, form a great number of navigable
      canals, in the same manner as the Nile does in Egypt. In the eastern
      provinces of China, too, several great rivers form, by their different
      branches, a multitude of canals, and, by communicating with one another,
      afford an inland navigation much more extensive than that either of the
      Nile or the Ganges, or, perhaps, than both of them put together. It is
      remarkable, that neither the ancient Egyptians, nor the Indians, nor the
      Chinese, encouraged foreign commerce, but seem all to have derived their
      great opulence from this inland navigation.  All the inland parts of Africa, and all that part of Asia which lies any
      considerable way north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, the ancient
      Scythia, the modern Tartary and Siberia, seem, in all ages of the world,
      to have been in the same barbarous and uncivilized state in which we find
      them at present. The sea of Tartary is the frozen ocean, which admits of
      no navigation; and though some of the greatest rivers in the world run
      through that country, they are at too great a distance from one another to
      carry commerce and communication through the greater part of it. There are
      in Africa none of those great inlets, such as the Baltic and Adriatic seas
      in Europe, the Mediterranean and Euxine seas in both Europe and Asia, and
      the gulfs of Arabia, Persia, India, Bengal, and Siam, in Asia, to carry
      maritime commerce into the interior parts of that great continent; and the
      great rivers of Africa are at too great a distance from one another to
      give occasion to any considerable inland navigation. The commerce,
      besides, which any nation can carry on by means of a river which does not
      break itself into any great number of branches or canals, and which runs
      into another territory before it reaches the sea, can never be very
      considerable, because it is always in the power of the nations who possess
      that other territory to obstruct the communication between the upper
      country and the sea. The navigation of the Danube is of very little use to
      the different states of Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary, in comparison of
      what it would be, if any of them possessed the whole of its course, till
      it falls into the Black sea.    CHAPTER IV. OF THE ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY.  When the division of labour has been once thoroughly established, it is
      but a very small part of a man’s wants which the produce of his own labour
      can supply. He supplies the far greater part of them by exchanging that
      surplus part of the produce of his own labour, which is over and above his
      own consumption, for such parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he
      has occasion for. Every man thus lives by exchanging, or becomes, in some
      measure, a merchant, and the society itself grows to be what is properly a
      commercial society.  But when the division of labour first began to take place, this power of
      exchanging must frequently have been very much clogged and embarrassed in
      its operations. One man, we shall suppose, has more of a certain commodity
      than he himself has occasion for, while another has less. The former,
      consequently, would be glad to dispose of; and the latter to purchase, a
      part of this superfluity. But if this latter should chance to have nothing
      that the former stands in need of, no exchange can be made between them.
      The butcher has more meat in his shop than he himself can consume, and the
      brewer and the baker would each of them be willing to purchase a part of
      it. But they have nothing to offer in exchange, except the different
      productions of their respective trades, and the butcher is already
      provided with all the bread and beer which he has immediate occasion for.
      No exchange can, in this case, be made between them. He cannot be their
      merchant, nor they his customers; and they are all of them thus mutually
      less serviceable to one another. In order to avoid the inconveniency of
      such situations, every prudent man in every period of society, after the
      first establishment of the division of labour, must naturally have
      endeavoured to manage his affairs in such a manner, as to have at all
      times by him, besides the peculiar produce of his own industry, a certain
      quantity of some one commodity or other, such as he imagined few people
      would be likely to refuse in exchange for the produce of their industry.
      Many different commodities, it is probable, were successively both thought
      of and employed for this purpose. In the rude ages of society, cattle are
      said to have been the common instrument of commerce; and, though they must
      have been a most inconvenient one, yet, in old times, we find things were
      frequently valued according to the number of cattle which had been given
      in exchange for them. The armour of Diomede, says Homer, cost only nine
      oxen; but that of Glaucus cost a hundred oxen. Salt is said to be the
      common instrument of commerce and exchanges in Abyssinia; a species of
      shells in some parts of the coast of India; dried cod at Newfoundland;
      tobacco in Virginia; sugar in some of our West India colonies; hides or
      dressed leather in some other countries; and there is at this day a
      village in Scotland, where it is not uncommon, I am told, for a workman to
      carry nails instead of money to the baker’s shop or the ale-house.  In all countries, however, men seem at last to have been determined by
      irresistible reasons to give the preference, for this employment, to
      metals above every other commodity. Metals can not only be kept with as
      little loss as any other commodity, scarce any thing being less perishable
      than they are, but they can likewise, without any loss, be divided into
      any number of parts, as by fusion those parts can easily be re-united
      again; a quality which no other equally durable commodities possess, and
      which, more than any other quality, renders them fit to be the instruments
      of commerce and circulation. The man who wanted to buy salt, for example,
      and had nothing but cattle to give in exchange for it, must have been
      obliged to buy salt to the value of a whole ox, or a whole sheep, at a
      time. He could seldom buy less than this, because what he was to give for
      it could seldom be divided without loss; and if he had a mind to buy more,
      he must, for the same reasons, have been obliged to buy double or triple
      the quantity, the value, to wit, of two or three oxen, or of two or three
      sheep. If, on the contrary, instead of sheep or oxen, he had metals to
      give in exchange for it, he could easily proportion the quantity of the
      metal to the precise quantity of the commodity which he had immediate
      occasion for.  Different metals have been made use of by different nations for this
      purpose. Iron was the common instrument of commerce among the ancient
      Spartans, copper among the ancient Romans, and gold and silver among all
      rich and commercial nations.  Those metals seem originally to have been made use of for this purpose in
      rude bars, without any stamp or coinage. Thus we are told by Pliny (Plin.
      Hist Nat. lib. 33, cap. 3), upon the authority of Timaeus, an ancient
      historian, that, till the time of Servius Tullius, the Romans had no
      coined money, but made use of unstamped bars of copper, to purchase
      whatever they had occasion for. These rude bars, therefore, performed at
      this time the function of money.  The use of metals in this rude state was attended with two very
      considerable inconveniences; first, with the trouble of weighing, and
      secondly, with that of assaying them. In the precious metals, where a
      small difference in the quantity makes a great difference in the value,
      even the business of weighing, with proper exactness, requires at least
      very accurate weights and scales. The weighing of gold, in particular, is
      an operation of some nicety in the coarser metals, indeed, where a small
      error would be of little consequence, less accuracy would, no doubt, be
      necessary. Yet we should find it excessively troublesome if every time a
      poor man had occasion either to buy or sell a farthing’s worth of goods,
      he was obliged to weigh the farthing. The operation of assaying is still
      more difficult, still more tedious; and, unless a part of the metal is
      fairly melted in the crucible, with proper dissolvents, any conclusion
      that can be drawn from it is extremely uncertain. Before the institution
      of coined money, however, unless they went through this tedious and
      difficult operation, people must always have been liable to the grossest
      frauds and impositions; and instead of a pound weight of pure silver, or
      pure copper, might receive, in exchange for their goods, an adulterated
      composition of the coarsest and cheapest materials, which had, however, in
      their outward appearance, been made to resemble those metals. To prevent
      such abuses, to facilitate exchanges, and thereby to encourage all sorts
      of industry and commerce, it has been found necessary, in all countries
      that have made any considerable advances towards improvement, to affix a
      public stamp upon certain quantities of such particular metals, as were in
      those countries commonly made use of to purchase goods. Hence the origin
      of coined money, and of those public offices called mints; institutions
      exactly of the same nature with those of the aulnagers and stamp-masters
      of woollen and linen cloth. All of them are equally meant to ascertain, by
      means of a public stamp, the quantity and uniform goodness of those
      different commodities when brought to market.  The first public stamps of this kind that were affixed to the current
      metals, seem in many cases to have been intended to ascertain, what it was
      both most difficult and most important to ascertain, the goodness or
      fineness of the metal, and to have resembled the sterling mark which is at
      present affixed to plate and bars of silver, or the Spanish mark which is
      sometimes affixed to ingots of gold, and which, being struck only upon one
      side of the piece, and not covering the whole surface, ascertains the
      fineness, but not the weight of the metal. Abraham weighs to Ephron the
      four hundred shekels of silver which he had agreed to pay for the field of
      Machpelah. They are said, however, to be the current money of the
      merchant, and yet are received by weight, and not by tale, in the same
      manner as ingots of gold and bars of silver are at present. The revenues
      of the ancient Saxon kings of England are said to have been paid, not in
      money, but in kind, that is, in victuals and provisions of all sorts.
      William the Conqueror introduced the custom of paying them in money. This
      money, however, was for a long time, received at the exchequer, by weight,
      and not by tale.  The inconveniency and difficulty of weighing those metals with exactness,
      gave occasion to the institution of coins, of which the stamp, covering
      entirely both sides of the piece, and sometimes the edges too, was
      supposed to ascertain not only the fineness, but the weight of the metal.
      Such coins, therefore, were received by tale, as at present, without the
      trouble of weighing.  The denominations of those coins seem originally to have expressed the
      weight or quantity of metal contained in them. In the time of Servius
      Tullius, who first coined money at Rome, the Roman as or pondo contained a
      Roman pound of good copper. It was divided, in the same manner as our
      Troyes pound, into twelve ounces, each of which contained a real ounce of
      good copper. The English pound sterling, in the time of Edward I.
      contained a pound, Tower weight, of silver of a known fineness. The Tower
      pound seems to have been something more than the Roman pound, and
      something less than the Troyes pound. This last was not introduced into
      the mint of England till the 18th of Henry the VIII. The French livre
      contained, in the time of Charlemagne, a pound, Troyes weight, of silver
      of a known fineness. The fair of Troyes in Champaign was at that time
      frequented by all the nations of Europe, and the weights and measures of
      so famous a market were generally known and esteemed. The Scots money
      pound contained, from the time of Alexander the First to that of Robert
      Bruce, a pound of silver of the same weight and fineness with the English
      pound sterling. English, French, and Scots pennies, too, contained all of
      them originally a real penny-weight of silver, the twentieth part of an
      ounce, and the two hundred-and-fortieth part of a pound. The shilling,
      too, seems originally to have been the denomination of a weight. “When
      wheat is at twelve shillings the quarter,” says an ancient statute of
      Henry III. “then wastel bread of a farthing shall weigh eleven shillings
      and fourpence”. The proportion, however, between the shilling, and either
      the penny on the one hand, or the pound on the other, seems not to have
      been so constant and uniform as that between the penny and the pound.
      During the first race of the kings of France, the French sou or shilling
      appears upon different occasions to have contained five, twelve, twenty,
      and forty pennies. Among the ancient Saxons, a shilling appears at one
      time to have contained only five pennies, and it is not improbable that it
      may have been as variable among them as among their neighbours, the
      ancient Franks. From the time of Charlemagne among the French, and from
      that of William the Conqueror among the English, the proportion between
      the pound, the shilling, and the penny, seems to have been uniformly the
      same as at present, though the value of each has been very different; for
      in every country of the world, I believe, the avarice and injustice of
      princes and sovereign states, abusing the confidence of their subjects,
      have by degrees diminished the real quantity of metal, which had been
      originally contained in their coins. The Roman as, in the latter ages of
      the republic, was reduced to the twenty-fourth part of its original value,
      and, instead of weighing a pound, came to weigh only half an ounce. The
      English pound and penny contain at present about a third only; the Scots
      pound and penny about a thirty-sixth; and the French pound and penny about
      a sixty-sixth part of their original value. By means of those operations,
      the princes and sovereign states which performed them were enabled, in
      appearance, to pay their debts and fulfil their engagements with a smaller
      quantity of silver than would otherwise have been requisite. It was indeed
      in appearance only; for their creditors were really defrauded of a part of
      what was due to them. All other debtors in the state were allowed the same
      privilege, and might pay with the same nominal sum of the new and debased
      coin whatever they had borrowed in the old. Such operations, therefore,
      have always proved favourable to the debtor, and ruinous to the creditor,
      and have sometimes produced a greater and more universal revolution in the
      fortunes of private persons, than could have been occasioned by a very
      great public calamity.  It is in this manner that money has become, in all civilized nations, the
      universal instrument of commerce, by the intervention of which goods of
      all kinds are bought and sold, or exchanged for one another.  What are the rules which men naturally observe, in exchanging them either
      for money, or for one another, I shall now proceed to examine. These rules
      determine what may be called the relative or exchangeable value of goods.  The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and
      sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes
      the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object
      conveys. The one may be called ‘value in use;’ the other, ‘value in
      exchange.’ The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently
      little or no value in exchange; and, on the contrary, those which have the
      greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use.
      Nothing is more useful than water; but it will purchase scarce any thing;
      scarce any thing can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the
      contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a very great quantity of other
      goods may frequently be had in exchange for it.  In order to investigate the principles which regulate the exchangeable
      value of commodities, I shall endeavour to shew,  First, what is the real measure of this exchangeable value; or wherein
      consists the real price of all commodities.  Secondly, what are the different parts of which this real price is
      composed or made up.  And, lastly, what are the different circumstances which sometimes raise
      some or all of these different parts of price above, and sometimes sink
      them below, their natural or ordinary rate; or, what are the causes which
      sometimes hinder the market price, that is, the actual price of
      commodities, from coinciding exactly with what may be called their natural
      price.  I shall endeavour to explain, as fully and distinctly as I can, those
      three subjects in the three following chapters, for which I must very
      earnestly entreat both the patience and attention of the reader: his
      patience, in order to examine a detail which may, perhaps, in some places,
      appear unnecessarily tedious; and his attention, in order to understand
      what may perhaps, after the fullest explication which I am capable of
      giving it, appear still in some degree obscure. I am always willing to run
      some hazard of being tedious, in order to be sure that I am perspicuous;
      and, after taking the utmost pains that I can to be perspicuous, some
      obscurity may still appear to remain upon a subject, in its own nature
      extremely abstracted.    CHAPTER V. OF THE REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE OF
COMMODITIES, OR OF THEIR PRICE IN LABOUR, AND THEIR PRICE IN MONEY.  Every man is rich or poor according to the degree in which he can afford
      to enjoy the necessaries, conveniencies, and amusements of human life. But
      after the division of labour has once thoroughly taken place, it is but a
      very small part of these with which a man’s own labour can supply him. The
      far greater part of them he must derive from the labour of other people,
      and he must be rich or poor according to the quantity of that labour which
      he can command, or which he can afford to purchase. The value of any
      commodity, therefore, to the person who possesses it, and who means not to
      use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is
      equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or
      command. Labour therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value
      of all commodities.  The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man
      who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. What
      every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it and who wants
      to dispose of it, or exchange it for something else, is the toil and
      trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose upon other
      people. What is bought with money, or with goods, is purchased by labour,
      as much as what we acquire by the toil of our own body. That money, or
      those goods, indeed, save us this toil. They contain the value of a
      certain quantity of labour, which we exchange for what is supposed at the
      time to contain the value of an equal quantity. Labour was the first
      price, the original purchase money that was paid for all things. It was
      not by gold or by silver, but by labour, that all the wealth of the world
      was originally purchased; and its value, to those who possess it, and who
      want to exchange it for some new productions, is precisely equal to the
      quantity of labour which it can enable them to purchase or command.  Wealth, as Mr Hobbes says, is power. But the person who either acquires,
      or succeeds to a great fortune, does not necessarily acquire or succeed to
      any political power, either civil or military. His fortune may, perhaps,
      afford him the means of acquiring both; but the mere possession of that
      fortune does not necessarily convey to him either. The power which that
      possession immediately and directly conveys to him, is the power of
      purchasing a certain command over all the labour, or over all the produce
      of labour which is then in the market. His fortune is greater or less,
      precisely in proportion to the extent of this power, or to the quantity
      either of other men’s labour, or, what is the same thing, of the produce
      of other men’s labour, which it enables him to purchase or command. The
      exchangeable value of every thing must always be precisely equal to the
      extent of this power which it conveys to its owner.  But though labour be the real measure of the exchangeable value of all
      commodities, it is not that by which their value is commonly estimated. It
      is often difficult to ascertain the proportion between two different
      quantities of labour. The time spent in two different sorts of work will
      not always alone determine this proportion. The different degrees of
      hardship endured, and of ingenuity exercised, must likewise be taken into
      account. There may be more labour in an hour’s hard work, than in two
      hours easy business; or in an hour’s application to a trade which it cost
      ten years labour to learn, than in a month’s industry, at an ordinary and
      obvious employment. But it is not easy to find any accurate measure either
      of hardship or ingenuity. In exchanging, indeed, the different productions
      of different sorts of labour for one another, some allowance is commonly
      made for both. It is adjusted, however, not by any accurate measure, but
      by the higgling and bargaining of the market, according to that sort of
      rough equality which, though not exact, is sufficient for carrying on the
      business of common life.  Every commodity, besides, is more frequently exchanged for, and thereby
      compared with, other commodities, than with labour. It is more natural,
      therefore, to estimate its exchangeable value by the quantity of some
      other commodity, than by that of the labour which it can produce. The
      greater part of people, too, understand better what is meant by a quantity
      of a particular commodity, than by a quantity of labour. The one is a
      plain palpable object; the other an abstract notion, which though it can
      be made sufficiently intelligible, is not altogether so natural and
      obvious.  But when barter ceases, and money has become the common instrument of
      commerce, every particular commodity is more frequently exchanged for
      money than for any other commodity. The butcher seldom carries his beef or
      his mutton to the baker or the brewer, in order to exchange them for bread
      or for beer; but he carries them to the market, where he exchanges them
      for money, and afterwards exchanges that money for bread and for beer. The
      quantity of money which he gets for them regulates, too, the quantity of
      bread and beer which he can afterwards purchase. It is more natural and
      obvious to him, therefore, to estimate their value by the quantity of
      money, the commodity for which he immediately exchanges them, than by that
      of bread and beer, the commodities for which he can exchange them only by
      the intervention of another commodity; and rather to say that his
      butcher’s meat is worth three-pence or fourpence a-pound, than that it is
      worth three or four pounds of bread, or three or four quarts of small
      beer. Hence it comes to pass, that the exchangeable value of every
      commodity is more frequently estimated by the quantity of money, than by
      the quantity either of labour or of any other commodity which can be had
      in exchange for it.  Gold and silver, however, like every other commodity, vary in their value;
      are sometimes cheaper and sometimes dearer, sometimes of easier and
      sometimes of more difficult purchase. The quantity of labour which any
      particular quantity of them can purchase or command, or the quantity of
      other goods which it will exchange for, depends always upon the fertility
      or barrenness of the mines which happen to be known about the time when
      such exchanges are made. The discovery of the abundant mines of America,
      reduced, in the sixteenth century, the value of gold and silver in Europe
      to about a third of what it had been before. As it cost less labour to
      bring those metals from the mine to the market, so, when they were brought
      thither, they could purchase or command less labour; and this revolution
      in their value, though perhaps the greatest, is by no means the only one
      of which history gives some account. But as a measure of quantity, such as
      the natural foot, fathom, or handful, which is continually varying in its
      own quantity, can never be an accurate measure of the quantity of other
      things; so a commodity which is itself continually varying in its own
      value, can never be an accurate measure of the value of other commodities.
      Equal quantities of labour, at all times and places, may be said to be of
      equal value to the labourer. In his ordinary state of health, strength,
      and spirits; in the ordinary degree of his skill and dexterity, he must
      always lay down the same portion of his ease, his liberty, and his
      happiness. The price which he pays must always be the same, whatever may
      be the quantity of goods which he receives in return for it. Of these,
      indeed, it may sometimes purchase a greater and sometimes a smaller
      quantity; but it is their value which varies, not that of the labour which
      purchases them. At all times and places, that is dear which it is
      difficult to come at, or which it costs much labour to acquire; and that
      cheap which is to be had easily, or with very little labour. Labour alone,
      therefore, never varying in its own value, is alone the ultimate and real
      standard by which the value of all commodities can at all times and places
      be estimated and compared. It is their real price; money is their nominal
      price only.  But though equal quantities of labour are always of equal value to the
      labourer, yet to the person who employs him they appear sometimes to be of
      greater, and sometimes of smaller value. He purchases them sometimes with
      a greater, and sometimes with a smaller quantity of goods, and to him the
      price of labour seems to vary like that of all other things. It appears to
      him dear in the one case, and cheap in the other. In reality, however, it
      is the goods which are cheap in the one case, and dear in the other.  In this popular sense, therefore, labour, like commodities, may be said to
      have a real and a nominal price. Its real price may be said to consist in
      the quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of life which are given
      for it; its nominal price, in the quantity of money. The labourer is rich
      or poor, is well or ill rewarded, in proportion to the real, not to the
      nominal price of his labour.  The distinction between the real and the nominal price of commodities and
      labour is not a matter of mere speculation, but may sometimes be of
      considerable use in practice. The same real price is always of the same
      value; but on account of the variations in the value of gold and silver,
      the same nominal price is sometimes of very different values. When a
      landed estate, therefore, is sold with a reservation of a perpetual rent,
      if it is intended that this rent should always be of the same value, it is
      of importance to the family in whose favour it is reserved, that it should
      not consist in a particular sum of money. Its value would in this case be
      liable to variations of two different kinds: first, to those which arise
      from the different quantities of gold and silver which are contained at
      different times in coin of the same denomination; and, secondly, to those
      which arise from the different values of equal quantities of gold and
      silver at different times.  Princes and sovereign states have frequently fancied that they had a
      temporary interest to diminish the quantity of pure metal contained in
      their coins; but they seldom have fancied that they had any to augment it.
      The quantity of metal contained in the coins, I believe of all nations,
      has accordingly been almost continually diminishing, and hardly ever
      augmenting. Such variations, therefore, tend almost always to diminish the
      value of a money rent.  The discovery of the mines of America diminished the value of gold and
      silver in Europe. This diminution, it is commonly supposed, though I
      apprehend without any certain proof, is still going on gradually, and is
      likely to continue to do so for a long time. Upon this supposition,
      therefore, such variations are more likely to diminish than to augment the
      value of a money rent, even though it should be stipulated to be paid, not
      in such a quantity of coined money of such a denomination (in so many
      pounds sterling, for example), but in so many ounces, either of pure
      silver, or of silver of a certain standard.  The rents which have been reserved in corn, have preserved their value
      much better than those which have been reserved in money, even where the
      denomination of the coin has not been altered. By the 18th of Elizabeth,
      it was enacted, that a third of the rent of all college leases should be
      reserved in corn, to be paid either in kind, or according to the current
      prices at the nearest public market. The money arising from this corn
      rent, though originally but a third of the whole, is, in the present
      times, according to Dr. Blackstone, commonly near double of what arises
      from the other two-thirds. The old money rents of colleges must, according
      to this account, have sunk almost to a fourth part of their ancient value,
      or are worth little more than a fourth part of the corn which they were
      formerly worth. But since the reign of Philip and Mary, the denomination
      of the English coin has undergone little or no alteration, and the same
      number of pounds, shillings, and pence, have contained very nearly the
      same quantity of pure silver. This degradation, therefore, in the value of
      the money rents of colleges, has arisen altogether from the degradation in
      the price of silver.  When the degradation in the value of silver is combined with the
      diminution of the quantity of it contained in the coin of the same
      denomination, the loss is frequently still greater. In Scotland, where the
      denomination of the coin has undergone much greater alterations than it
      ever did in England, and in France, where it has undergone still greater
      than it ever did in Scotland, some ancient rents, originally of
      considerable value, have, in this manner, been reduced almost to nothing.  Equal quantities of labour will, at distant times, be purchased more
      nearly with equal quantities of corn, the subsistence of the labourer,
      than with equal quantities of gold and silver, or, perhaps, of any other
      commodity. Equal quantities of corn, therefore, will, at distant times, be
      more nearly of the same real value, or enable the possessor to purchase or
      command more nearly the same quantity of the labour of other people. They
      will do this, I say, more nearly than equal quantities of almost any other
      commodity; for even equal quantities of corn will not do it exactly. The
      subsistence of the labourer, or the real price of labour, as I shall
      endeavour to shew hereafter, is very different upon different occasions;
      more liberal in a society advancing to opulence, than in one that is
      standing still, and in one that is standing still, than in one that is
      going backwards. Every other commodity, however, will, at any particular
      time, purchase a greater or smaller quantity of labour, in proportion to
      the quantity of subsistence which it can purchase at that time. A rent,
      therefore, reserved in corn, is liable only to the variations in the
      quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can purchase. But a
      rent reserved in any other commodity is liable, not only to the variations
      in the quantity of labour which any particular quantity of corn can
      purchase, but to the variations in the quantity of corn which can be
      purchased by any particular quantity of that commodity.  Though the real value of a corn rent, it is to be observed, however,
      varies much less from century to century than that of a money rent, it
      varies much more from year to year. The money price of labour, as I shall
      endeavour to shew hereafter, does not fluctuate from year to year with the
      money price of corn, but seems to be everywhere accommodated, not to the
      temporary or occasional, but to the average or ordinary price of that
      necessary of life. The average or ordinary price of corn, again is
      regulated, as I shall likewise endeavour to shew hereafter, by the value
      of silver, by the richness or barrenness of the mines which supply the
      market with that metal, or by the quantity of labour which must be
      employed, and consequently of corn which must be consumed, in order to
      bring any particular quantity of silver from the mine to the market. But
      the value of silver, though it sometimes varies greatly from century to
      century, seldom varies much from year to year, but frequently continues
      the same, or very nearly the same, for half a century or a century
      together. The ordinary or average money price of corn, therefore, may,
      during so long a period, continue the same, or very nearly the same, too,
      and along with it the money price of labour, provided, at least, the
      society continues, in other respects, in the same, or nearly in the same,
      condition. In the mean time, the temporary and occasional price of corn
      may frequently be double one year of what it had been the year before, or
      fluctuate, for example, from five-and-twenty to fifty shillings the
      quarter. But when corn is at the latter price, not only the nominal, but
      the real value of a corn rent, will be double of what it is when at the
      former, or will command double the quantity either of labour, or of the
      greater part of other commodities; the money price of labour, and along
      with it that of most other things, continuing the same during all these
      fluctuations.  Labour, therefore, it appears evidently, is the only universal, as well as
      the only accurate, measure of value, or the only standard by which we can
      compare the values of different commodities, at all times, and at all
      places. We cannot estimate, it is allowed, the real value of different
      commodities from century to century by the quantities of silver which were
      given for them. We cannot estimate it from year to year by the quantities
      of corn. By the quantities of labour, we can, with the greatest accuracy,
      estimate it, both from century to century, and from year to year. From
      century to century, corn is a better measure than silver, because, from
      century to century, equal quantities of corn will command the same
      quantity of labour more nearly than equal quantities of silver. From year
      to year, on the contrary, silver is a better measure than corn, because
      equal quantities of it will more nearly command the same quantity of
      labour.  But though, in establishing perpetual rents, or even in letting very long
      leases, it may be of use to distinguish between real and nominal price; it
      is of none in buying and selling, the more common and ordinary
      transactions of human life.  At the same time and place, the real and the nominal price of all
      commodities are exactly in proportion to one another. The more or less
      money you get for any commodity, in the London market, for example, the
      more or less labour it will at that time and place enable you to purchase
      or command. At the same time and place, therefore, money is the exact
      measure of the real exchangeable value of all commodities. It is so,
      however, at the same time and place only.  Though at distant places there is no regular proportion between the real
      and the money price of commodities, yet the merchant who carries goods
      from the one to the other, has nothing to consider but the money price, or
      the difference between the quantity of silver for which he buys them, and
      that for which he is likely to sell them. Half an ounce of silver at
      Canton in China may command a greater quantity both of labour and of the
      necessaries and conveniencies of life, than an ounce at London. A
      commodity, therefore, which sells for half an ounce of silver at Canton,
      may there be really dearer, of more real importance to the man who
      possesses it there, than a commodity which sells for an ounce at London is
      to the man who possesses it at London. If a London merchant, however, can
      buy at Canton, for half an ounce of silver, a commodity which he can
      afterwards sell at London for an ounce, he gains a hundred per cent. by
      the bargain, just as much as if an ounce of silver was at London exactly
      of the same value as at Canton. It is of no importance to him that half an
      ounce of silver at Canton would have given him the command of more labour,
      and of a greater quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of life
      than an ounce can do at London. An ounce at London will always give him
      the command of double the quantity of all these, which half an ounce could
      have done there, and this is precisely what he wants.  As it is the nominal or money price of goods, therefore, which finally
      determines the prudence or imprudence of all purchases and sales, and
      thereby regulates almost the whole business of common life in which price
      is concerned, we cannot wonder that it should have been so much more
      attended to than the real price.  In such a work as this, however, it may sometimes be of use to compare the
      different real values of a particular commodity at different times and
      places, or the different degrees of power over the labour of other people
      which it may, upon different occasions, have given to those who possessed
      it. We must in this case compare, not so much the different quantities of
      silver for which it was commonly sold, as the different quantities or
      labour which those different quantities of silver could have purchased.
      But the current prices of labour, at distant times and places, can scarce
      ever be known with any degree of exactness. Those of corn, though they
      have in few places been regularly recorded, are in general better known,
      and have been more frequently taken notice of by historians and other
      writers. We must generally, therefore, content ourselves with them, not as
      being always exactly in the same proportion as the current prices of
      labour, but as being the nearest approximation which can commonly be had
      to that proportion. I shall hereafter have occasion to make several
      comparisons of this kind.  In the progress of industry, commercial nations have found it convenient
      to coin several different metals into money; gold for larger payments,
      silver for purchases of moderate value, and copper, or some other coarse
      metal, for those of still smaller consideration, They have always,
      however, considered one of those metals as more peculiarly the measure of
      value than any of the other two; and this preference seems generally to
      have been given to the metal which they happen first to make use of as the
      instrument of commerce. Having once begun to use it as their standard,
      which they must have done when they had no other money, they have
      generally continued to do so even when the necessity was not the same.  The Romans are said to have had nothing but copper money till within five
      years before the first Punic war (Pliny, lib. xxxiii. cap. 3), when they
      first began to coin silver. Copper, therefore, appears to have continued
      always the measure of value in that republic. At Rome all accounts appear
      to have been kept, and the value of all estates to have been computed,
      either in asses or in sestertii. The as was always the denomination of a
      copper coin. The word sestertius signifies two asses and a half. Though
      the sestertius, therefore, was originally a silver coin, its value was
      estimated in copper. At Rome, one who owed a great deal of money was said
      to have a great deal of other people’s copper.  The northern nations who established themselves upon the ruins of the
      Roman empire, seem to have had silver money from the first beginning of
      their settlements, and not to have known either gold or copper coins for
      several ages thereafter. There were silver coins in England in the time of
      the Saxons; but there was little gold coined till the time of Edward III
      nor any copper till that of James I. of Great Britain. In England,
      therefore, and for the same reason, I believe, in all other modern nations
      of Europe, all accounts are kept, and the value of all goods and of all
      estates is generally computed, in silver: and when we mean to express the
      amount of a person’s fortune, we seldom mention the number of guineas, but
      the number of pounds sterling which we suppose would be given for it.  Originally, in all countries, I believe, a legal tender of payment could
      be made only in the coin of that metal which was peculiarly considered as
      the standard or measure of value. In England, gold was not considered as a
      legal tender for a long time after it was coined into money. The
      proportion between the values of gold and silver money was not fixed by
      any public law or proclamation, but was left to be settled by the market.
      If a debtor offered payment in gold, the creditor might either reject such
      payment altogether, or accept of it at such a valuation of the gold as he
      and his debtor could agree upon. Copper is not at present a legal tender,
      except in the change of the smaller silver coins.  In this state of things, the distinction between the metal which was the
      standard, and that which was not the standard, was something more than a
      nominal distinction.  In process of time, and as people became gradually more familiar with the
      use of the different metals in coin, and consequently better acquainted
      with the proportion between their respective values, it has, in most
      countries, I believe, been found convenient to ascertain this proportion,
      and to declare by a public law, that a guinea, for example, of such a
      weight and fineness, should exchange for one-and-twenty shillings, or be a
      legal tender for a debt of that amount. In this state of things, and
      during the continuance of any one regulated proportion of this kind, the
      distinction between the metal, which is the standard, and that which is
      not the standard, becomes little more than a nominal distinction.  In consequence of any change, however, in this regulated proportion, this
      distinction becomes, or at least seems to become, something more than
      nominal again. If the regulated value of a guinea, for example, was either
      reduced to twenty, or raised to two-and-twenty shillings, all accounts
      being kept, and almost all obligations for debt being expressed, in silver
      money, the greater part of payments could in either case be made with the
      same quantity of silver money as before; but would require very different
      quantities of gold money; a greater in the one case, and a smaller in the
      other. Silver would appear to be more invariable in its value than gold.
      Silver would appear to measure the value of gold, and gold would not
      appear to measure the value of silver. The value of gold would seem to
      depend upon the quantity of silver which it would exchange for, and the
      value of silver would not seem to depend upon the quantity of gold which
      it would exchange for. This difference, however, would be altogether owing
      to the custom of keeping accounts, and of expressing the amount of all
      great and small sums rather in silver than in gold money. One of Mr
      Drummond’s notes for five-and-twenty or fifty guineas would, after an
      alteration of this kind, be still payable with five-and-twenty or fifty
      guineas, in the same manner as before. It would, after such an alteration,
      be payable with the same quantity of gold as before, but with very
      different quantities of silver. In the payment of such a note, gold would
      appear to be more invariable in its value than silver. Gold would appear
      to measure the value of silver, and silver would not appear to measure the
      value of gold. If the custom of keeping accounts, and of expressing
      promissory-notes and other obligations for money, in this manner should
      ever become general, gold, and not silver, would be considered as the
      metal which was peculiarly the standard or measure of value.  In reality, during the continuance of any one regulated proportion between
      the respective values of the different metals in coin, the value of the
      most precious metal regulates the value of the whole coin. Twelve copper
      pence contain half a pound avoirdupois of copper, of not the best quality,
      which, before it is coined, is seldom worth seven-pence in silver. But as,
      by the regulation, twelve such pence are ordered to exchange for a
      shilling, they are in the market considered as worth a shilling, and a
      shilling can at any time be had for them. Even before the late reformation
      of the gold coin of Great Britain, the gold, that part of it at least
      which circulated in London and its neighbourhood, was in general less
      degraded below its standard weight than the greater part of the silver.
      One-and-twenty worn and defaced shillings, however, were considered as
      equivalent to a guinea, which, perhaps, indeed, was worn and defaced too,
      but seldom so much so. The late regulations have brought the gold coin as
      near, perhaps, to its standard weight as it is possible to bring the
      current coin of any nation; and the order to receive no gold at the public
      offices but by weight, is likely to preserve it so, as long as that order
      is enforced. The silver coin still continues in the same worn and degraded
      state as before the reformation of the cold coin. In the market, however,
      one-and-twenty shillings of this degraded silver coin are still considered
      as worth a guinea of this excellent gold coin.  The reformation of the gold coin has evidently raised the value of the
      silver coin which can be exchanged for it.  In the English mint, a pound weight of gold is coined into forty-four
      guineas and a half, which at one-and-twenty shillings the guinea, is equal
      to forty-six pounds fourteen shillings and sixpence. An ounce of such gold
      coin, therefore, is worth £ 3:17:10½ in silver. In England, no duty or
      seignorage is paid upon the coinage, and he who carries a pound weight or
      an ounce weight of standard gold bullion to the mint, gets back a pound
      weight or an ounce weight of gold in coin, without any deduction. Three
      pounds seventeen shillings and tenpence halfpenny an ounce, therefore, is
      said to be the mint price of gold in England, or the quantity of gold coin
      which the mint gives in return for standard gold bullion.  Before the reformation of the gold coin, the price of standard gold
      bullion in the market had, for many years, been upwards of £3:18s.
      sometimes £ 3:19s, and very frequently £4 an ounce; that sum, it is
      probable, in the worn and degraded gold coin, seldom containing more than
      an ounce of standard gold. Since the reformation of the gold coin, the
      market price of standard gold bullion seldom exceeds £ 3:17:7 an ounce.
      Before the reformation of the gold coin, the market price was always more
      or less above the mint price. Since that reformation, the market price has
      been constantly below the mint price. But that market price is the same
      whether it is paid in gold or in silver coin. The late reformation of the
      gold coin, therefore, has raised not only the value of the gold coin, but
      likewise that of the silver coin in proportion to gold bullion, and
      probably, too, in proportion to all other commodities; though the price of
      the greater part of other commodities being influenced by so many other
      causes, the rise in the value of either gold or silver coin in proportion
      to them may not be so distinct and sensible.  In the English mint, a pound weight of standard silver bullion is coined
      into sixty-two shillings, containing, in the same manner, a pound weight
      of standard silver. Five shillings and twopence an ounce, therefore, is
      said to be the mint price of silver in England, or the quantity of silver
      coin which the mint gives in return for standard silver bullion. Before
      the reformation of the gold coin, the market price of standard silver
      bullion was, upon different occasions, five shillings and fourpence, five
      shillings and fivepence, five shillings and sixpence, five shillings and
      sevenpence, and very often five shillings and eightpence an ounce. Five
      shillings and sevenpence, however, seems to have been the most common
      price. Since the reformation of the gold coin, the market price of
      standard silver bullion has fallen occasionally to five shillings and
      threepence, five shillings and fourpence, and five shillings and fivepence
      an ounce, which last price it has scarce ever exceeded. Though the market
      price of silver bullion has fallen considerably since the reformation of
      the gold coin, it has not fallen so low as the mint price.  In the proportion between the different metals in the English coin, as
      copper is rated very much above its real value, so silver is rated
      somewhat below it. In the market of Europe, in the French coin and in the
      Dutch coin, an ounce of fine gold exchanges for about fourteen ounces of
      fine silver. In the English coin, it exchanges for about fifteen ounces,
      that is, for more silver than it is worth, according to the common
      estimation of Europe. But as the price of copper in bars is not, even in
      England, raised by the high price of copper in English coin, so the price
      of silver in bullion is not sunk by the low rate of silver in English
      coin. Silver in bullion still preserves its proper proportion to gold, for
      the same reason that copper in bars preserves its proper proportion to
      silver.  Upon the reformation of the silver coin, in the reign of William III., the
      price of silver bullion still continued to be somewhat above the mint
      price. Mr Locke imputed this high price to the permission of exporting
      silver bullion, and to the prohibition of exporting silver coin. This
      permission of exporting, he said, rendered the demand for silver bullion
      greater than the demand for silver coin. But the number of people who want
      silver coin for the common uses of buying and selling at home, is surely
      much greater than that of those who want silver bullion either for the use
      of exportation or for any other use. There subsists at present a like
      permission of exporting gold bullion, and a like prohibition of exporting
      gold coin; and yet the price of gold bullion has fallen below the mint
      price. But in the English coin, silver was then, in the same manner as
      now, under-rated in proportion to gold; and the gold coin (which at that
      time, too, was not supposed to require any reformation) regulated then, as
      well as now, the real value of the whole coin. As the reformation of the
      silver coin did not then reduce the price of silver bullion to the mint
      price, it is not very probable that a like reformation will do so now.  Were the silver coin brought back as near to its standard weight as the
      gold, a guinea, it is probable, would, according to the present
      proportion, exchange for more silver in coin than it would purchase in
      bullion. The silver coin containing its full standard weight, there would
      in this case, be a profit in melting it down, in order, first to sell the
      bullion for gold coin, and afterwards to exchange this gold coin for
      silver coin, to be melted down in the same manner. Some alteration in the
      present proportion seems to be the only method of preventing this
      inconveniency.  The inconveniency, perhaps, would be less, if silver was rated in the coin
      as much above its proper proportion to gold as it is at present rated
      below it, provided it was at the same time enacted, that silver should not
      be a legal tender for more than the change of a guinea, in the same manner
      as copper is not a legal tender for more than the change of a shilling. No
      creditor could, in this case, be cheated in consequence of the high
      valuation of silver in coin; as no creditor can at present be cheated in
      consequence of the high valuation of copper. The bankers only would suffer
      by this regulation. When a run comes upon them, they sometimes endeavour
      to gain time, by paying in sixpences, and they would be precluded by this
      regulation from this discreditable method of evading immediate payment.
      They would be obliged, in consequence, to keep at all times in their
      coffers a greater quantity of cash than at present; and though this might,
      no doubt, be a considerable inconveniency to them, it would, at the same
      time, be a considerable security to their creditors.  Three pounds seventeen shillings and tenpence halfpenny (the mint price of
      gold) certainly does not contain, even in our present excellent gold coin,
      more than an ounce of standard gold, and it may be thought, therefore,
      should not purchase more standard bullion. But gold in coin is more
      convenient than gold in bullion; and though, in England, the coinage is
      free, yet the gold which is carried in bullion to the mint, can seldom be
      returned in coin to the owner till after a delay of several weeks. In the
      present hurry of the mint, it could not be returned till after a delay of
      several months. This delay is equivalent to a small duty, and renders gold
      in coin somewhat more valuable than an equal quantity of gold in bullion.
      If, in the English coin, silver was rated according to its proper
      proportion to gold, the price of silver bullion would probably fall below
      the mint price, even without any reformation of the silver coin; the value
      even of the present worn and defaced silver coin being regulated by the
      value of the excellent gold coin for which it can be changed.  A small seignorage or duty upon the coinage of both gold and silver, would
      probably increase still more the superiority of those metals in coin above
      an equal quantity of either of them in bullion. The coinage would, in this
      case, increase the value of the metal coined in proportion to the extent
      of this small duty, for the same reason that the fashion increases the
      value of plate in proportion to the price of that fashion. The superiority
      of coin above bullion would prevent the melting down of the coin, and
      would discourage its exportation. If, upon any public exigency, it should
      become necessary to export the coin, the greater part of it would soon
      return again, of its own accord. Abroad, it could sell only for its weight
      in bullion. At home, it would buy more than that weight. There would be a
      profit, therefore, in bringing it home again. In France, a seignorage of
      about eight per cent. is imposed upon the coinage, and the French coin,
      when exported, is said to return home again, of its own accord.  The occasional fluctuations in the market price of gold and silver bullion
      arise from the same causes as the like fluctuations in that of all other
      commodities. The frequent loss of those metals from various accidents by
      sea and by land, the continual waste of them in gilding and plating, in
      lace and embroidery, in the wear and tear of coin, and in that of plate,
      require, in all countries which possess no mines of their own, a continual
      importation, in order to repair this loss and this waste. The merchant
      importers, like all other merchants, we may believe, endeavour, as well as
      they can, to suit their occasional importations to what they judge is
      likely to be the immediate demand. With all their attention, however, they
      sometimes overdo the business, and sometimes underdo it. When they import
      more bullion than is wanted, rather than incur the risk and trouble of
      exporting it again, they are sometimes willing to sell a part of it for
      something less than the ordinary or average price. When, on the other
      hand, they import less than is wanted, they get something more than this
      price. But when, under all those occasional fluctuations, the market price
      either of gold or silver bullion continues for several years together
      steadily and constantly, either more or less above, or more or less below
      the mint price, we may be assured that this steady and constant, either
      superiority or inferiority of price, is the effect of something in the
      state of the coin, which, at that time, renders a certain quantity of coin
      either of more value or of less value than the precise quantity of bullion
      which it ought to contain. The constancy and steadiness of the effect
      supposes a proportionable constancy and steadiness in the cause.  The money of any particular country is, at any particular time and place,
      more or less an accurate measure or value, according as the current coin
      is more or less exactly agreeable to its standard, or contains more or
      less exactly the precise quantity of pure gold or pure silver which it
      ought to contain. If in England, for example, forty-four guineas and a
      half contained exactly a pound weight of standard gold, or eleven ounces
      of fine gold, and one ounce of alloy, the gold coin of England would be as
      accurate a measure of the actual value of goods at any particular time and
      place as the nature of the thing would admit. But if, by rubbing and
      wearing, forty-four guineas and a half generally contain less than a pound
      weight of standard gold, the diminution, however, being greater in some
      pieces than in others, the measure of value comes to be liable to the same
      sort of uncertainty to which all other weights and measures are commonly
      exposed. As it rarely happens that these are exactly agreeable to their
      standard, the merchant adjusts the price of his goods as well as he can,
      not to what those weights and measures ought to be, but to what, upon an
      average, he finds, by experience, they actually are. In consequence of a
      like disorder in the coin, the price of goods comes, in the same manner,
      to be adjusted, not to the quantity of pure gold or silver which the coin
      ought to contain, but to that which, upon an average, it is found, by
      experience, it actually does contain.  By the money price of goods, it is to be observed, I understand always the
      quantity of pure gold or silver for which they are sold, without any
      regard to the denomination of the coin. Six shillings and eight pence, for
      example, in the time of Edward I., I consider as the same money price with
      a pound sterling in the present times, because it contained, as nearly as
      we can judge, the same quantity of pure silver.    CHAPTER VI. OF THE COMPONENT PART OF THE PRICE OF COMMODITIES.  In that early and rude state of society which precedes both the
      accumulation of stock and the appropriation of land, the proportion
      between the quantities of labour necessary for acquiring different
      objects, seems to be the only circumstance which can afford any rule for
      exchanging them for one another. If among a nation of hunters, for
      example, it usually costs twice the labour to kill a beaver which it does
      to kill a deer, one beaver should naturally exchange for or be worth two
      deer. It is natural that what is usually the produce of two days or two
      hours labour, should be worth double of what is usually the produce of one
      day’s or one hour’s labour.  If the one species of labour should be more severe than the other, some
      allowance will naturally be made for this superior hardship; and the
      produce of one hour’s labour in the one way may frequently exchange for
      that of two hour’s labour in the other.  Or if the one species of labour requires an uncommon degree of dexterity
      and ingenuity, the esteem which men have for such talents, will naturally
      give a value to their produce, superior to what would be due to the time
      employed about it. Such talents can seldom be acquired but in consequence
      of long application, and the superior value of their produce may
      frequently be no more than a reasonable compensation for the time and
      labour which must be spent in acquiring them. In the advanced state of
      society, allowances of this kind, for superior hardship and superior
      skill, are commonly made in the wages of labour; and something of the same
      kind must probably have taken place in its earliest and rudest period.  In this state of things, the whole produce of labour belongs to the
      labourer; and the quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or
      producing any commodity, is the only circumstance which can regulate the
      quantity of labour which it ought commonly to purchase, command, or
      exchange for.  As soon as stock has accumulated in the hands of particular persons, some
      of them will naturally employ it in setting to work industrious people,
      whom they will supply with materials and subsistence, in order to make a
      profit by the sale of their work, or by what their labour adds to the
      value of the materials. In exchanging the complete manufacture either for
      money, for labour, or for other goods, over and above what may be
      sufficient to pay the price of the materials, and the wages of the
      workmen, something must be given for the profits of the undertaker of the
      work, who hazards his stock in this adventure. The value which the workmen
      add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into two
      parts, of which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their
      employer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he advanced. He
      could have no interest to employ them, unless he expected from the sale of
      their work something more than what was sufficient to replace his stock to
      him; and he could have no interest to employ a great stock rather than a
      small one, unless his profits were to bear some proportion to the extent
      of his stock.  The profits of stock, it may perhaps be thought, are only a different name
      for the wages of a particular sort of labour, the labour of inspection and
      direction. They are, however, altogether different, are regulated by quite
      different principles, and bear no proportion to the quantity, the
      hardship, or the ingenuity of this supposed labour of inspection and
      direction. They are regulated altogether by the value of the stock
      employed, and are greater or smaller in proportion to the extent of this
      stock. Let us suppose, for example, that in some particular place, where
      the common annual profits of manufacturing stock are ten per cent. there
      are two different manufactures, in each of which twenty workmen are
      employed, at the rate of fifteen pounds a year each, or at the expense of
      three hundred a-year in each manufactory. Let us suppose, too, that the
      coarse materials annually wrought up in the one cost only seven hundred
      pounds, while the finer materials in the other cost seven thousand. The
      capital annually employed in the one will, in this case, amount only to
      one thousand pounds; whereas that employed in the other will amount to
      seven thousand three hundred pounds. At the rate of ten per cent.
      therefore, the undertaker of the one will expect a yearly profit of about
      one hundred pounds only; while that of the other will expect about seven
      hundred and thirty pounds. But though their profits are so very different,
      their labour of inspection and direction may be either altogether or very
      nearly the same. In many great works, almost the whole labour of this kind
      is committed to some principal clerk. His wages properly express the value
      of this labour of inspection and direction. Though in settling them some
      regard is had commonly, not only to his labour and skill, but to the trust
      which is reposed in him, yet they never bear any regular proportion to the
      capital of which he oversees the management; and the owner of this
      capital, though he is thus discharged of almost all labour, still expects
      that his profit should bear a regular proportion to his capital. In the
      price of commodities, therefore, the profits of stock constitute a
      component part altogether different from the wages of labour, and
      regulated by quite different principles.  In this state of things, the whole produce of labour does not always
      belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of
      the stock which employs him. Neither is the quantity of labour commonly
      employed in acquiring or producing any commodity, the only circumstance
      which can regulate the quantity which it ought commonly to purchase,
      command or exchange for. An additional quantity, it is evident, must be
      due for the profits of the stock which advanced the wages and furnished
      the materials of that labour.  As soon as the land of any country has all become private property, the
      landlords, like all other men, love to reap where they never sowed, and
      demand a rent even for its natural produce. The wood of the forest, the
      grass of the field, and all the natural fruits of the earth, which, when
      land was in common, cost the labourer only the trouble of gathering them,
      come, even to him, to have an additional price fixed upon them. He must
      then pay for the licence to gather them, and must give up to the landlord
      a portion of what his labour either collects or produces. This portion,
      or, what comes to the same thing, the price of this portion, constitutes
      the rent of land, and in the price of the greater part of commodities,
      makes a third component part.  The real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be
      observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of
      them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value, not only of that
      part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which
      resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.  In every society, the price of every commodity finally resolves itself
      into some one or other, or all of those three parts; and in every improved
      society, all the three enter, more or less, as component parts, into the
      price of the far greater part of commodities.  In the price of corn, for example, one part pays the rent of the landlord,
      another pays the wages or maintenance of the labourers and labouring
      cattle employed in producing it, and the third pays the profit of the
      farmer. These three parts seem either immediately or ultimately to make up
      the whole price of corn. A fourth part, it may perhaps be thought is
      necessary for replacing the stock of the farmer, or for compensating the
      wear and tear of his labouring cattle, and other instruments of husbandry.
      But it must be considered, that the price of any instrument of husbandry,
      such as a labouring horse, is itself made up of the same time parts; the
      rent of the land upon which he is reared, the labour of tending and
      rearing him, and the profits of the farmer, who advances both the rent of
      this land, and the wages of this labour. Though the price of the corn,
      therefore, may pay the price as well as the maintenance of the horse, the
      whole price still resolves itself, either immediately or ultimately, into
      the same three parts of rent, labour, and profit.  In the price of flour or meal, we must add to the price of the corn, the
      profits of the miller, and the wages of his servants; in the price of
      bread, the profits of the baker, and the wages of his servants; and in the
      price of both, the labour of transporting the corn from the house of the
      farmer to that of the miller, and from that of the miller to that of the
      baker, together with the profits of those who advance the wages of that
      labour.  The price of flax resolves itself into the same three parts as that of
      corn. In the price of linen we must add to this price the wages of the
      flax-dresser, of the spinner, of the weaver, of the bleacher, etc.
      together with the profits of their respective employers.  As any particular commodity comes to be more manufactured, that part of
      the price which resolves itself into wages and profit, comes to be greater
      in proportion to that which resolves itself into rent. In the progress of
      the manufacture, not only the number of profits increase, but every
      subsequent profit is greater than the foregoing; because the capital from
      which it is derived must always be greater. The capital which employs the
      weavers, for example, must be greater than that which employs the
      spinners; because it not only replaces that capital with its profits, but
      pays, besides, the wages of the weavers: and the profits must always bear
      some proportion to the capital.  In the most improved societies, however, there are always a few
      commodities of which the price resolves itself into two parts only: the
      wages of labour, and the profits of stock; and a still smaller number, in
      which it consists altogether in the wages of labour. In the price of
      sea-fish, for example, one part pays the labour of the fisherman, and the
      other the profits of the capital employed in the fishery. Rent very seldom
      makes any part of it, though it does sometimes, as I shall shew hereafter.
      It is otherwise, at least through the greater part of Europe, in river
      fisheries. A salmon fishery pays a rent; and rent, though it cannot well
      be called the rent of land, makes a part of the price of a salmon, as well
      as wares and profit. In some parts of Scotland, a few poor people make a
      trade of gathering, along the sea-shore, those little variegated stones
      commonly known by the name of Scotch pebbles. The price which is paid to
      them by the stone-cutter, is altogether the wages of their labour; neither
      rent nor profit makes an part of it.  But the whole price of any commodity must still finally resolve itself
      into some one or other or all of those three parts; as whatever part of it
      remains after paying the rent of the land, and the price of the whole
      labour employed in raising, manufacturing, and bringing it to market, must
      necessarily be profit to somebody.  As the price or exchangeable value of every particular commodity, taken
      separately, resolves itself into some one or other, or all of those three
      parts; so that of all the commodities which compose the whole annual
      produce of the labour of every country, taken complexly, must resolve
      itself into the same three parts, and be parcelled out among different
      inhabitants of the country, either as the wages of their labour, the
      profits of their stock, or the rent of their land. The whole of what is
      annually either collected or produced by the labour of every society, or,
      what comes to the same thing, the whole price of it, is in this manner
      originally distributed among some of its different members. Wages, profit,
      and rent, are the three original sources of all revenue, as well as of all
      exchangeable value. All other revenue is ultimately derived from some one
      or other of these.  Whoever derives his revenue from a fund which is his own, must draw it
      either from his labour, from his stock, or from his land. The revenue
      derived from labour is called wages; that derived from stock, by the
      person who manages or employs it, is called profit; that derived from it
      by the person who does not employ it himself, but lends it to another, is
      called the interest or the use of money. It is the compensation which the
      borrower pays to the lender, for the profit which he has an opportunity of
      making by the use of the money. Part of that profit naturally belongs to
      the borrower, who runs the risk and takes the trouble of employing it, and
      part to the lender, who affords him the opportunity of making this profit.
      The interest of money is always a derivative revenue, which, if it is not
      paid from the profit which is made by the use of the money, must be paid
      from some other source of revenue, unless perhaps the borrower is a
      spendthrift, who contracts a second debt in order to pay the interest of
      the first. The revenue which proceeds altogether from land, is called
      rent, and belongs to the landlord. The revenue of the farmer is derived
      partly from his labour, and partly from his stock. To him, land is only
      the instrument which enables him to earn the wages of this labour, and to
      make the profits of this stock. All taxes, and all the revenue which is
      founded upon them, all salaries, pensions, and annuities of every kind,
      are ultimately derived from some one or other of those three original
      sources of revenue, and are paid either immediately or mediately from the
      wages of labour, the profits of stock, or the rent of land.  When those three different sorts of revenue belong to different persons,
      they are readily distinguished; but when they belong to the same, they are
      sometimes confounded with one another, at least in common language.  A gentleman who farms a part of his own estate, after paying the expense
      of cultivation, should gain both the rent of the landlord and the profit
      of the farmer. He is apt to denominate, however, his whole gain, profit,
      and thus confounds rent with profit, at least in common language. The
      greater part of our North American and West Indian planters are in this
      situation. They farm, the greater part of them, their own estates: and
      accordingly we seldom hear of the rent of a plantation, but frequently of
      its profit.  Common farmers seldom employ any overseer to direct the general operations
      of the farm. They generally, too, work a good deal with their own hands,
      as ploughmen, harrowers, etc. What remains of the crop, after paying the
      rent, therefore, should not only replace to them their stock employed in
      cultivation, together with its ordinary profits, but pay them the wages
      which are due to them, both as labourers and overseers. Whatever remains,
      however, after paying the rent and keeping up the stock, is called profit.
      But wages evidently make a part of it. The farmer, by saving these wages,
      must necessarily gain them. Wages, therefore, are in this case confounded
      with profit.  An independent manufacturer, who has stock enough both to purchase
      materials, and to maintain himself till he can carry his work to market,
      should gain both the wages of a journeyman who works under a master, and
      the profit which that master makes by the sale of that journeyman’s work.
      His whole gains, however, are commonly called profit, and wages are, in
      this case, too, confounded with profit.  A gardener who cultivates his own garden with his own hands, unites in his
      own person the three different characters, of landlord, farmer, and
      labourer. His produce, therefore, should pay him the rent of the first,
      the profit of the second, and the wages of the third. The whole, however,
      is commonly considered as the earnings of his labour. Both rent and profit
      are, in this case, confounded with wages.  As in a civilized country there are but few commodities of which the
      exchangeable value arises from labour only, rent and profit contributing
      largely to that of the far greater part of them, so the annual produce of
      its labour will always be sufficient to purchase or command a much greater
      quantity of labour than what was employed in raising, preparing, and
      bringing that produce to market. If the society were annually to employ
      all the labour which it can annually purchase, as the quantity of labour
      would increase greatly every year, so the produce of every succeeding year
      would be of vastly greater value than that of the foregoing. But there is
      no country in which the whole annual produce is employed in maintaining
      the industrious. The idle everywhere consume a great part of it; and,
      according to the different proportions in which it is annually divided
      between those two different orders of people, its ordinary or average
      value must either annually increase or diminish, or continue the same from
      one year to another.    CHAPTER VII. OF THE NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE OF COMMODITIES.  There is in every society or neighbourhood an ordinary or average rate,
      both of wages and profit, in every different employment of labour and
      stock. This rate is naturally regulated, as I shall shew hereafter, partly
      by the general circumstances of the society, their riches or poverty,
      their advancing, stationary, or declining condition, and partly by the
      particular nature of each employment.  There is likewise in every society or neighbourhood an ordinary or average
      rate of rent, which is regulated, too, as I shall shew hereafter, partly
      by the general circumstances of the society or neighbourhood in which the
      land is situated, and partly by the natural or improved fertility of the
      land.  These ordinary or average rates may be called the natural rates of wages,
      profit and rent, at the time and place in which they commonly prevail.  When the price of any commodity is neither more nor less than what is
      sufficient to pay the rent of the land, the wages of the labour, and the
      profits of the stock employed in raising, preparing, and bringing it to
      market, according to their natural rates, the commodity is then sold for
      what may be called its natural price.  The commodity is then sold precisely for what it is worth, or for what it
      really costs the person who brings it to market; for though, in common
      language, what is called the prime cost of any commodity does not
      comprehend the profit of the person who is to sell it again, yet, if he
      sells it at a price which does not allow him the ordinary rate of profit
      in his neighbourhood, he is evidently a loser by the trade; since, by
      employing his stock in some other way, he might have made that profit. His
      profit, besides, is his revenue, the proper fund of his subsistence. As,
      while he is preparing and bringing the goods to market, he advances to his
      workmen their wages, or their subsistence; so he advances to himself, in
      the same manner, his own subsistence, which is generally suitable to the
      profit which he may reasonably expect from the sale of his goods. Unless
      they yield him this profit, therefore, they do not repay him what they may
      very properly be said to have really cost him.  Though the price, therefore, which leaves him this profit, is not always
      the lowest at which a dealer may sometimes sell his goods, it is the
      lowest at which he is likely to sell them for any considerable time; at
      least where there is perfect liberty, or where he may change his trade as
      often as he pleases.  The actual price at which any commodity is commonly sold, is called its
      market price. It may either be above, or below, or exactly the same with
      its natural price.  The market price of every particular commodity is regulated by the
      proportion between the quantity which is actually brought to market, and
      the demand of those who are willing to pay the natural price of the
      commodity, or the whole value of the rent, labour, and profit, which must
      be paid in order to bring it thither. Such people may be called the
      effectual demanders, and their demand the effectual demand; since it maybe
      sufficient to effectuate the bringing of the commodity to market. It is
      different from the absolute demand. A very poor man may be said, in some
      sense, to have a demand for a coach and six; he might like to have it; but
      his demand is not an effectual demand, as the commodity can never be
      brought to market in order to satisfy it.  When the quantity of any commodity which is brought to market falls short
      of the effectual demand, all those who are willing to pay the whole value
      of the rent, wages, and profit, which must be paid in order to bring it
      thither, cannot be supplied with the quantity which they want. Rather than
      want it altogether, some of them will be willing to give more. A
      competition will immediately begin among them, and the market price will
      rise more or less above the natural price, according as either the
      greatness of the deficiency, or the wealth and wanton luxury of the
      competitors, happen to animate more or less the eagerness of the
      competition. Among competitors of equal wealth and luxury, the same
      deficiency will generally occasion a more or less eager competition,
      according as the acquisition of the commodity happens to be of more or
      less importance to them. Hence the exorbitant price of the necessaries of
      life during the blockade of a town, or in a famine.  When the quantity brought to market exceeds the effectual demand, it
      cannot be all sold to those who are willing to pay the whole value of the
      rent, wages, and profit, which must be paid in order to bring it thither.
      Some part must be sold to those who are willing to pay less, and the low
      price which they give for it must reduce the price of the whole. The
      market price will sink more or less below the natural price, according as
      the greatness of the excess increases more or less the competition of the
      sellers, or according as it happens to be more or less important to them
      to get immediately rid of the commodity. The same excess in the
      importation of perishable, will occasion a much greater competition than
      in that of durable commodities; in the importation of oranges, for
      example, than in that of old iron.  When the quantity brought to market is just sufficient to supply the
      effectual demand, and no more, the market price naturally comes to be
      either exactly, or as nearly as can be judged of, the same with the
      natural price. The whole quantity upon hand can be disposed of for this
      price, and can not be disposed of for more. The competition of the
      different dealers obliges them all to accept of this price, but does not
      oblige them to accept of less.  The quantity of every commodity brought to market naturally suits itself
      to the effectual demand. It is the interest of all those who employ their
      land, labour, or stock, in bringing any commodity to market, that the
      quantity never should exceed the effectual demand; and it is the interest
      of all other people that it never should fall short of that demand.  If at any time it exceeds the effectual demand, some of the component
      parts of its price must be paid below their natural rate. If it is rent,
      the interest of the landlords will immediately prompt them to withdraw a
      part of their land; and if it is wages or profit, the interest of the
      labourers in the one case, and of their employers in the other, will
      prompt them to withdraw a part of their labour or stock, from this
      employment. The quantity brought to market will soon be no more than
      sufficient to supply the effectual demand. All the different parts of its
      price will rise to their natural rate, and the whole price to its natural
      price.  If, on the contrary, the quantity brought to market should at any time
      fall short of the effectual demand, some of the component parts of its
      price must rise above their natural rate. If it is rent, the interest of
      all other landlords will naturally prompt them to prepare more land for
      the raising of this commodity; if it is wages or profit, the interest of
      all other labourers and dealers will soon prompt them to employ more
      labour and stock in preparing and bringing it to market. The quantity
      brought thither will soon be sufficient to supply the effectual demand.
      All the different parts of its price will soon sink to their natural rate,
      and the whole price to its natural price.  The natural price, therefore, is, as it were, the central price, to which
      the prices of all commodities are continually gravitating. Different
      accidents may sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and
      sometimes force them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the
      obstacles which hinder them from settling in this centre of repose and
      continuance, they are constantly tending towards it.  The whole quantity of industry annually employed in order to bring any
      commodity to market, naturally suits itself in this manner to the
      effectual demand. It naturally aims at bringing always that precise
      quantity thither which may be sufficient to supply, and no more than
      supply, that demand.  But, in some employments, the same quantity of industry will, in different
      years, produce very different quantities of commodities; while, in others,
      it will produce always the same, or very nearly the same. The same number
      of labourers in husbandry will, in different years, produce very different
      quantities of corn, wine, oil, hops, etc. But the same number of spinners
      or weavers will every year produce the same, or very nearly the same,
      quantity of linen and woollen cloth. It is only the average produce of the
      one species of industry which can be suited, in any respect, to the
      effectual demand; and as its actual produce is frequently much greater,
      and frequently much less, than its average produce, the quantity of the
      commodities brought to market will sometimes exceed a good deal, and
      sometimes fall short a good deal, of the effectual demand. Even though
      that demand, therefore, should continue always the same, their market
      price will be liable to great fluctuations, will sometimes fall a good
      deal below, and sometimes rise a good deal above, their natural price. In
      the other species of industry, the produce of equal quantities of labour
      being always the same, or very nearly the same, it can be more exactly
      suited to the effectual demand. While that demand continues the same,
      therefore, the market price of the commodities is likely to do so too, and
      to be either altogether, or as nearly as can be judged of, the same with
      the natural price. That the price of linen and woollen cloth is liable
      neither to such frequent, nor to such great variations, as the price of
      corn, every man’s experience will inform him. The price of the one species
      of commodities varies only with the variations in the demand; that of the
      other varies not only with the variations in the demand, but with the much
      greater, and more frequent, variations in the quantity of what is brought
      to market, in order to supply that demand.  The occasional and temporary fluctuations in the market price of any
      commodity fall chiefly upon those parts of its price which resolve
      themselves into wages and profit. That part which resolves itself into
      rent is less affected by them. A rent certain in money is not in the least
      affected by them, either in its rate or in its value. A rent which
      consists either in a certain proportion, or in a certain quantity, of the
      rude produce, is no doubt affected in its yearly value by all the
      occasional and temporary fluctuations in the market price of that rude
      produce; but it is seldom affected by them in its yearly rate. In settling
      the terms of the lease, the landlord and farmer endeavour, according to
      their best judgment, to adjust that rate, not to the temporary and
      occasional, but to the average and ordinary price of the produce.  Such fluctuations affect both the value and the rate, either of wages or
      of profit, according as the market happens to be either overstocked or
      understocked with commodities or with labour, with work done, or with work
      to be done. A public mourning raises the price of black cloth (with which
      the market is almost always understocked upon such occasions), and
      augments the profits of the merchants who possess any considerable
      quantity of it. It has no effect upon the wages of the weavers. The market
      is understocked with commodities, not with labour, with work done, not
      with work to be done. It raises the wages of journeymen tailors. The
      market is here understocked with labour. There is an effectual demand for
      more labour, for more work to be done, than can be had. It sinks the price
      of coloured silks and cloths, and thereby reduces the profits of the
      merchants who have any considerable quantity of them upon hand. It sinks,
      too, the wages of the workmen employed in preparing such commodities, for
      which all demand is stopped for six months, perhaps for a twelvemonth. The
      market is here overstocked both with commodities and with labour.  But though the market price of every particular commodity is in this
      manner continually gravitating, if one may say so, towards the natural
      price; yet sometimes particular accidents, sometimes natural causes, and
      sometimes particular regulations of policy, may, in many commodities, keep
      up the market price, for a long time together, a good deal above the
      natural price.  When, by an increase in the effectual demand, the market price of some
      particular commodity happens to rise a good deal above the natural price,
      those who employ their stocks in supplying that market, are generally
      careful to conceal this change. If it was commonly known, their great
      profit would tempt so many new rivals to employ their stocks in the same
      way, that, the effectual demand being fully supplied, the market price
      would soon be reduced to the natural price, and, perhaps, for some time
      even below it. If the market is at a great distance from the residence of
      those who supply it, they may sometimes be able to keep the secret for
      several years together, and may so long enjoy their extraordinary profits
      without any new rivals. Secrets of this kind, however, it must be
      acknowledged, can seldom be long kept; and the extraordinary profit can
      last very little longer than they are kept.  Secrets in manufactures are capable of being longer kept than secrets in
      trade. A dyer who has found the means of producing a particular colour
      with materials which cost only half the price of those commonly made use
      of, may, with good management, enjoy the advantage of his discovery as
      long as he lives, and even leave it as a legacy to his posterity. His
      extraordinary gains arise from the high price which is paid for his
      private labour. They properly consist in the high wages of that labour.
      But as they are repeated upon every part of his stock, and as their whole
      amount bears, upon that account, a regular proportion to it, they are
      commonly considered as extraordinary profits of stock.  Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effects of
      particular accidents, of which, however, the operation may sometimes last
      for many years together.  Some natural productions require such a singularity of soil and situation,
      that all the land in a great country, which is fit for producing them, may
      not be sufficient to supply the effectual demand. The whole quantity
      brought to market, therefore, may be disposed of to those who are willing
      to give more than what is sufficient to pay the rent of the land which
      produced them, together with the wages of the labour and the profits of
      the stock which were employed in preparing and bringing them to market,
      according to their natural rates. Such commodities may continue for whole
      centuries together to be sold at this high price; and that part of it
      which resolves itself into the rent of land, is in this case the part
      which is generally paid above its natural rate. The rent of the land which
      affords such singular and esteemed productions, like the rent of some
      vineyards in France of a peculiarly happy soil and situation, bears no
      regular proportion to the rent of other equally fertile and equally well
      cultivated land in its neighbourhood. The wages of the labour, and the
      profits of the stock employed in bringing such commodities to market, on
      the contrary, are seldom out of their natural proportion to those of the
      other employments of labour and stock in their neighbourhood.  Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effect of natural
      causes, which may hinder the effectual demand from ever being fully
      supplied, and which may continue, therefore, to operate for ever.  A monopoly granted either to an individual or to a trading company, has
      the same effect as a secret in trade or manufactures. The monopolists, by
      keeping the market constantly understocked by never fully supplying the
      effectual demand, sell their commodities much above the natural price, and
      raise their emoluments, whether they consist in wages or profit, greatly
      above their natural rate.  The price of monopoly is upon every occasion the highest which can be got.
      The natural price, or the price of free competition, on the contrary, is
      the lowest which can be taken, not upon every occasion indeed, but for any
      considerable time together. The one is upon every occasion the highest
      which can be squeezed out of the buyers, or which it is supposed they will
      consent to give; the other is the lowest which the sellers can commonly
      afford to take, and at the same time continue their business.  The exclusive privileges of corporations, statutes of apprenticeship, and
      all those laws which restrain in particular employments, the competition
      to a smaller number than might otherwise go into them, have the same
      tendency, though in a less degree. They are a sort of enlarged monopolies,
      and may frequently, for ages together, and in whole classes of
      employments, keep up the market price of particular commodities above the
      natural price, and maintain both the wages of the labour and the profits
      of the stock employed about them somewhat above their natural rate.  Such enhancements of the market price may last as long as the regulations
      of policy which give occasion to them.  The market price of any particular commodity, though it may continue long
      above, can seldom continue long below, its natural price. Whatever part of
      it was paid below the natural rate, the persons whose interest it affected
      would immediately feel the loss, and would immediately withdraw either so
      much land or so much labour, or so much stock, from being employed about
      it, that the quantity brought to market would soon be no more than
      sufficient to supply the effectual demand. Its market price, therefore,
      would soon rise to the natural price; this at least would be the case
      where there was perfect liberty.  The same statutes of apprenticeship and other corporation laws, indeed,
      which, when a manufacture is in prosperity, enable the workman to raise
      his wages a good deal above their natural rate, sometimes oblige him, when
      it decays, to let them down a good deal below it. As in the one case they
      exclude many people from his employment, so in the other they exclude him
      from many employments. The effect of such regulations, however, is not
      near so durable in sinking the workman’s wages below, as in raising them
      above their natural rate. Their operation in the one way may endure for
      many centuries, but in the other it can last no longer than the lives of
      some of the workmen who were bred to the business in the time of its
      prosperity. When they are gone, the number of those who are afterwards
      educated to the trade will naturally suit itself to the effectual demand.
      The policy must be as violent as that of Indostan or ancient Egypt (where
      every man was bound by a principle of religion to follow the occupation of
      his father, and was supposed to commit the most horrid sacrilege if he
      changed it for another), which can in any particular employment, and for
      several generations together, sink either the wages of labour or the
      profits of stock below their natural rate.  This is all that I think necessary to be observed at present concerning
      the deviations, whether occasional or permanent, of the market price of
      commodities from the natural price.  The natural price itself varies with the natural rate of each of its
      component parts, of wages, profit, and rent; and in every society this
      rate varies according to their circumstances, according to their riches or
      poverty, their advancing, stationary, or declining condition. I shall, in
      the four following chapters, endeavour to explain, as fully and distinctly
      as I can, the causes of those different variations.  First, I shall endeavour to explain what are the circumstances which
      naturally determine the rate of wages, and in what manner those
      circumstances are affected by the riches or poverty, by the advancing,
      stationary, or declining state of the society.  Secondly, I shall endeavour to shew what are the circumstances which
      naturally determine the rate of profit; and in what manner, too, those
      circumstances are affected by the like variations in the state of the
      society.  Though pecuniary wages and profit are very different in the different
      employments of labour and stock; yet a certain proportion seems commonly
      to take place between both the pecuniary wages in all the different
      employments of labour, and the pecuniary profits in all the different
      employments of stock. This proportion, it will appear hereafter, depends
      partly upon the nature of the different employments, and partly upon the
      different laws and policy of the society in which they are carried on. But
      though in many respects dependent upon the laws and policy, this
      proportion seems to be little affected by the riches or poverty of that
      society, by its advancing, stationary, or declining condition, but to
      remain the same, or very nearly the same, in all those different states. I
      shall, in the third place, endeavour to explain all the different
      circumstances which regulate this proportion.  In the fourth and last place, I shall endeavour to shew what are the
      circumstances which regulate the rent of land, and which either raise or
      lower the real price of all the different substances which it produces.    CHAPTER VIII. OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.  The produce of labour constitutes the natural recompence or wages of
      labour. In that original state of things which precedes both the
      appropriation of land and the accumulation of stock, the whole produce of
      labour belongs to the labourer. He has neither landlord nor master to
      share with him.  Had this state continued, the wages of labour would have augmented with
      all those improvements in its productive powers, to which the division of
      labour gives occasion. All things would gradually have become cheaper.
      They would have been produced by a smaller quantity of labour; and as the
      commodities produced by equal quantities of labour would naturally in this
      state of things be exchanged for one another, they would have been
      purchased likewise with the produce of a smaller quantity.  But though all things would have become cheaper in reality, in appearance
      many things might have become dearer, than before, or have been exchanged
      for a greater quantity of other goods. Let us suppose, for example, that
      in the greater part of employments the productive powers of labour had
      been improved to tenfold, or that a day’s labour could produce ten times
      the quantity of work which it had done originally; but that in a
      particular employment they had been improved only to double, or that a
      day’s labour could produce only twice the quantity of work which it had
      done before. In exchanging the produce of a day’s labour in the greater
      part of employments for that of a day’s labour in this particular one, ten
      times the original quantity of work in them would purchase only twice the
      original quantity in it. Any particular quantity in it, therefore, a pound
      weight, for example, would appear to be five times dearer than before. In
      reality, however, it would be twice as cheap. Though it required five
      times the quantity of other goods to purchase it, it would require only
      half the quantity of labour either to purchase or to produce it. The
      acquisition, therefore, would be twice as easy as before.  But this original state of things, in which the labourer enjoyed the whole
      produce of his own labour, could not last beyond the first introduction of
      the appropriation of land and the accumulation of stock. It was at an end,
      therefore, long before the most considerable improvements were made in the
      productive powers of labour; and it would be to no purpose to trace
      further what might have been its effects upon the recompence or wages of
      labour.  As soon as land becomes private property, the landlord demands a share of
      almost all the produce which the labourer can either raise or collect from
      it. His rent makes the first deduction from the produce of the labour
      which is employed upon land.  It seldom happens that the person who tills the ground has wherewithal to
      maintain himself till he reaps the harvest. His maintenance is generally
      advanced to him from the stock of a master, the farmer who employs him,
      and who would have no interest to employ him, unless he was to share in
      the produce of his labour, or unless his stock was to be replaced to him
      with a profit. This profit makes a second deduction from the produce of
      the labour which is employed upon land.  The produce of almost all other labour is liable to the like deduction of
      profit. In all arts and manufactures, the greater part of the workmen
      stand in need of a master, to advance them the materials of their work,
      and their wages and maintenance, till it be completed. He shares in the
      produce of their labour, or in the value which it adds to the materials
      upon which it is bestowed; and in this share consists his profit.  It sometimes happens, indeed, that a single independent workman has stock
      sufficient both to purchase the materials of his work, and to maintain
      himself till it be completed. He is both master and workman, and enjoys
      the whole produce of his own labour, or the whole value which it adds to
      the materials upon which it is bestowed. It includes what are usually two
      distinct revenues, belonging to two distinct persons, the profits of
      stock, and the wages of labour.  Such cases, however, are not very frequent; and in every part of Europe
      twenty workmen serve under a master for one that is independent, and the
      wages of labour are everywhere understood to be, what they usually are,
      when the labourer is one person, and the owner of the stock which employs
      him another.  What are the common wages of labour, depends everywhere upon the contract
      usually made between those two parties, whose interests are by no means
      the same. The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give as
      little, as possible. The former are disposed to combine in order to raise,
      the latter in order to lower, the wages of labour.  It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties must,
      upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force
      the other into a compliance with their terms. The masters, being fewer in
      number, can combine much more easily: and the law, besides, authorises, or
      at least does not prohibit, their combinations, while it prohibits those
      of the workmen. We have no acts of parliament against combining to lower
      the price of work, but many against combining to raise it. In all such
      disputes, the masters can hold out much longer. A landlord, a farmer, a
      master manufacturer, or merchant, though they did not employ a single
      workman, could generally live a year or two upon the stocks, which they
      have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a week, few could
      subsist a month, and scarce any a year, without employment. In the long
      run, the workman may be as necessary to his master as his master is to
      him; but the necessity is not so immediate.  We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters, though
      frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account,
      that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the
      subject. Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but
      constant and uniform, combination, not to raise the wages of labour above
      their actual rate. To violate this combination is everywhere a most
      unpopular action, and a sort of reproach to a master among his neighbours
      and equals. We seldom, indeed, hear of this combination, because it is the
      usual, and, one may say, the natural state of things, which nobody ever
      hears of. Masters, too, sometimes enter into particular combinations to
      sink the wages of labour even below this rate. These are always conducted
      with the utmost silence and secrecy till the moment of execution; and when
      the workmen yield, as they sometimes do without resistance, though
      severely felt by them, they are never heard of by other people. Such
      combinations, however, are frequently resisted by a contrary defensive
      combination of the workmen, who sometimes, too, without any provocation of
      this kind, combine, of their own accord, to raise the price of their
      labour. Their usual pretences are, sometimes the high price of provisions,
      sometimes the great profit which their masters make by their work. But
      whether their combinations be offensive or defensive, they are always
      abundantly heard of. In order to bring the point to a speedy decision,
      they have always recourse to the loudest clamour, and sometimes to the
      most shocking violence and outrage. They are desperate, and act with the
      folly and extravagance of desperate men, who must either starve, or
      frighten their masters into an immediate compliance with their demands.
      The masters, upon these occasions, are just as clamorous upon the other
      side, and never cease to call aloud for the assistance of the civil
      magistrate, and the rigorous execution of those laws which have been
      enacted with so much severity against the combination of servants,
      labourers, and journeymen. The workmen, accordingly, very seldom derive
      any advantage from the violence of those tumultuous combinations, which,
      partly from the interposition of the civil magistrate, partly from the
      superior steadiness of the masters, partly from the necessity which the
      greater part of the workmen are under of submitting for the sake of
      present subsistence, generally end in nothing but the punishment or ruin
      of the ringleaders.  But though, in disputes with their workmen, masters must generally have
      the advantage, there is, however, a certain rate, below which it seems
      impossible to reduce, for any considerable time, the ordinary wages even
      of the lowest species of labour.  A man must always live by his work, and his wages must at least be
      sufficient to maintain him. They must even upon most occasions be somewhat
      more, otherwise it would be impossible for him to bring up a family, and
      the race of such workmen could not last beyond the first generation. Mr
      Cantillon seems, upon this account, to suppose that the lowest species of
      common labourers must everywhere earn at least double their own
      maintenance, in order that, one with another, they may be enabled to bring
      up two children; the labour of the wife, on account of her necessary
      attendance on the children, being supposed no more than sufficient to
      provide for herself: But one half the children born, it is computed, die
      before the age of manhood. The poorest labourers, therefore, according to
      this account, must, one with another, attempt to rear at least four
      children, in order that two may have an equal chance of living to that
      age. But the necessary maintenance of four children, it is supposed, may
      be nearly equal to that of one man. The labour of an able-bodied slave,
      the same author adds, is computed to be worth double his maintenance; and
      that of the meanest labourer, he thinks, cannot be worth less than that of
      an able-bodied slave. Thus far at least seems certain, that, in order to
      bring up a family, the labour of the husband and wife together must, even
      in the lowest species of common labour, be able to earn something more
      than what is precisely necessary for their own maintenance; but in what
      proportion, whether in that above-mentioned, or many other, I shall not
      take upon me to determine.  There are certain circumstances, however, which sometimes give the
      labourers an advantage, and enable them to raise their wages considerably
      above this rate, evidently the lowest which is consistent with common
      humanity.  When in any country the demand for those who live by wages, labourers,
      journeymen, servants of every kind, is continually increasing; when every
      year furnishes employment for a greater number than had been employed the
      year before, the workmen have no occasion to combine in order to raise
      their wages. The scarcity of hands occasions a competition among masters,
      who bid against one another in order to get workmen, and thus voluntarily
      break through the natural combination of masters not to raise wages. The
      demand for those who live by wages, it is evident, cannot increase but in
      proportion to the increase of the funds which are destined to the payment
      of wages. These funds are of two kinds, first, the revenue which is over
      and above what is necessary for the maintenance; and, secondly, the stock
      which is over and above what is necessary for the employment of their
      masters.  When the landlord, annuitant, or monied man, has a greater revenue than
      what he judges sufficient to maintain his own family, he employs either
      the whole or a part of the surplus in maintaining one or more menial
      servants. Increase this surplus, and he will naturally increase the number
      of those servants.  When an independent workman, such as a weaver or shoemaker, has got more
      stock than what is sufficient to purchase the materials of his own work,
      and to maintain himself till he can dispose of it, he naturally employs
      one or more journeymen with the surplus, in order to make a profit by
      their work. Increase this surplus, and he will naturally increase the
      number of his journeymen.  The demand for those who live by wages, therefore, necessarily increases
      with the increase of the revenue and stock of every country, and cannot
      possibly increase without it. The increase of revenue and stock is the
      increase of national wealth. The demand for those who live by wages,
      therefore, naturally increases with the increase of national wealth, and
      cannot possibly increase without it.  It is not the actual greatness of national wealth, but its continual
      increase, which occasions a rise in the wages of labour. It is not,
      accordingly, in the richest countries, but in the most thriving, or in
      those which are growing rich the fastest, that the wages of labour are
      highest. England is certainly, in the present times, a much richer country
      than any part of North America. The wages of labour, however, are much
      higher in North America than in any part of England. In the province of
      New York, common labourers earned in 1773, before the commencement of the
      late disturbances, three shillings and sixpence currency, equal to two
      shillings sterling, a-day; ship-carpenters, ten shillings and sixpence
      currency, with a pint of rum, worth sixpence sterling, equal in all to six
      shillings and sixpence sterling; house-carpenters and bricklayers, eight
      shillings currency, equal to four shillings and sixpence sterling;
      journeymen tailors, five shillings currency, equal to about two shillings
      and tenpence sterling. These prices are all above the London price; and
      wages are said to be as high in the other colonies as in New York. The
      price of provisions is everywhere in North America much lower than in
      England. A dearth has never been known there. In the worst seasons they
      have always had a sufficiency for themselves, though less for exportation.
      If the money price of labour, therefore, be higher than it is anywhere in
      the mother-country, its real price, the real command of the necessaries
      and conveniencies of life which it conveys to the labourer, must be higher
      in a still greater proportion.  But though North America is not yet so rich as England, it is much more
      thriving, and advancing with much greater rapidity to the further
      acquisition of riches. The most decisive mark of the prosperity of any
      country is the increase of the number of its inhabitants. In Great
      Britain, and most other European countries, they are not supposed to
      double in less than five hundred years. In the British colonies in North
      America, it has been found that they double in twenty or five-and-twenty
      years. Nor in the present times is this increase principally owing to the
      continual importation of new inhabitants, but to the great multiplication
      of the species. Those who live to old age, it is said, frequently see
      there from fifty to a hundred, and sometimes many more, descendants from
      their own body. Labour is there so well rewarded, that a numerous family
      of children, instead of being a burden, is a source of opulence and
      prosperity to the parents. The labour of each child, before it can leave
      their house, is computed to be worth a hundred pounds clear gain to them.
      A young widow with four or five young children, who, among the middling or
      inferior ranks of people in Europe, would have so little chance for a
      second husband, is there frequently courted as a sort of fortune. The
      value of children is the greatest of all encouragements to marriage. We
      cannot, therefore, wonder that the people in North America should
      generally marry very young. Notwithstanding the great increase occasioned
      by such early marriages, there is a continual complaint of the scarcity of
      hands in North America. The demand for labourers, the funds destined for
      maintaining them increase, it seems, still faster than they can find
      labourers to employ.  Though the wealth of a country should be very great, yet if it has been
      long stationary, we must not expect to find the wages of labour very high
      in it. The funds destined for the payment of wages, the revenue and stock
      of its inhabitants, may be of the greatest extent; but if they have
      continued for several centuries of the same, or very nearly of the same
      extent, the number of labourers employed every year could easily supply,
      and even more than supply, the number wanted the following year. There
      could seldom be any scarcity of hands, nor could the masters be obliged to
      bid against one another in order to get them. The hands, on the contrary,
      would, in this case, naturally multiply beyond their employment. There
      would be a constant scarcity of employment, and the labourers would be
      obliged to bid against one another in order to get it. If in such a
      country the wages of labour had ever been more than sufficient to
      maintain the labourer, and to enable him to bring up a family, the
      competition of the labourers and the interest of the masters would soon
      reduce them to the lowest rate which is consistent with common humanity.
      China has been long one of the richest, that is, one of the most fertile,
      best cultivated, most industrious, and most populous, countries in the
      world. It seems, however, to have been long stationary. Marco Polo, who
      visited it more than five hundred years ago, describes its cultivation,
      industry, and populousness, almost in the same terms in which they are
      described by travellers in the present times. It had, perhaps, even long
      before his time, acquired that full complement of riches which the nature
      of its laws and institutions permits it to acquire. The accounts of all
      travellers, inconsistent in many other respects, agree in the low wages of
      labour, and in the difficulty which a labourer finds in bringing up a
      family in China. If by digging the ground a whole day he can get what will
      purchase a small quantity of rice in the evening, he is contented. The
      condition of artificers is, if possible, still worse. Instead of waiting
      indolently in their work-houses for the calls of their customers, as in
      Europe, they are continually running about the streets with the tools of
      their respective trades, offering their services, and, as it were, begging
      employment. The poverty of the lower ranks of people in China far
      surpasses that of the most beggarly nations in Europe. In the
      neighbourhood of Canton, many hundred, it is commonly said, many thousand
      families have no habitation on the land, but live constantly in little
      fishing-boats upon the rivers and canals. The subsistence which they find
      there is so scanty, that they are eager to fish up the nastiest garbage
      thrown overboard from any European ship. Any carrion, the carcase of a
      dead dog or cat, for example, though half putrid and stinking, is as
      welcome to them as the most wholesome food to the people of other
      countries. Marriage is encouraged in China, not by the profitableness of
      children, but by the liberty of destroying them. In all great towns,
      several are every night exposed in the street, or drowned like puppies in
      the water. The performance of this horrid office is even said to be the
      avowed business by which some people earn their subsistence.  China, however, though it may, perhaps, stand still, does not seem to go
      backwards. Its towns are nowhere deserted by their inhabitants. The lands
      which had once been cultivated, are nowhere neglected. The same, or very
      nearly the same, annual labour, must, therefore, continue to be performed,
      and the funds destined for maintaining it must not, consequently, be
      sensibly diminished. The lowest class of labourers, therefore,
      notwithstanding their scanty subsistence, must some way or another make
      shift to continue their race so far as to keep up their usual numbers.  But it would be otherwise in a country where the funds destined for the
      maintenance of labour were sensibly decaying. Every year the demand for
      servants and labourers would, in all the different classes of employments,
      be less than it had been the year before. Many who had been bred in the
      superior classes, not being able to find employment in their own business,
      would be glad to seek it in the lowest. The lowest class being not only
      overstocked with its own workmen, but with the overflowings of all the
      other classes, the competition for employment would be so great in it, as
      to reduce the wages of labour to the most miserable and scanty subsistence
      of the labourer. Many would not be able to find employment even upon these
      hard terms, but would either starve, or be driven to seek a subsistence,
      either by begging, or by the perpetration perhaps, of the greatest
      enormities. Want, famine, and mortality, would immediately prevail in that
      class, and from thence extend themselves to all the superior classes, till
      the number of inhabitants in the country was reduced to what could easily
      be maintained by the revenue and stock which remained in it, and which had
      escaped either the tyranny or calamity which had destroyed the rest. This,
      perhaps, is nearly the present state of Bengal, and of some other of the
      English settlements in the East Indies. In a fertile country, which had
      before been much depopulated, where subsistence, consequently, should not
      be very difficult, and where, notwithstanding, three or four hundred
      thousand people die of hunger in one year, we may be assured that the funds
      destined for the maintenance of the labouring poor are fast decaying. The
      difference between the genius of the British constitution, which protects
      and governs North America, and that of the mercantile company which
      oppresses and domineers in the East Indies, cannot, perhaps, be better
      illustrated than by the different state of those countries.  The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the necessary effect, so
      it is the natural symptom of increasing national wealth. The scanty
      maintenance of the labouring poor, on the other hand, is the natural
      symptom that things are at a stand, and their starving condition, that
      they are going fast backwards.  In Great Britain, the wages of labour seem, in the present times, to be
      evidently more than what is precisely necessary to enable the labourer to
      bring up a family. In order to satisfy ourselves upon this point, it will
      not be necessary to enter into any tedious or doubtful calculation of what
      may be the lowest sum upon which it is possible to do this. There are many
      plain symptoms, that the wages of labour are nowhere in this country
      regulated by this lowest rate, which is consistent with common humanity.  First, in almost every part of Great Britain there is a distinction, even
      in the lowest species of labour, between summer and winter wages. Summer
      wages are always highest. But, on account of the extraordinary expense of
      fuel, the maintenance of a family is most expensive in winter. Wages,
      therefore, being highest when this expense is lowest, it seems evident
      that they are not regulated by what is necessary for this expense, but by
      the quantity and supposed value of the work. A labourer, it may be said,
      indeed, ought to save part of his summer wages, in order to defray his
      winter expense; and that, through the whole year, they do not exceed what
      is necessary to maintain his family through the whole year. A slave,
      however, or one absolutely dependent on us for immediate subsistence,
      would not be treated in this manner. His daily subsistence would be
      proportioned to his daily necessities.  Secondly, the wages of labour do not, in Great Britain, fluctuate with the
      price of provisions. These vary everywhere from year to year, frequently
      from month to month. But in many places, the money price of labour remains
      uniformly the same, sometimes for half a century together. If, in these
      places, therefore, the labouring poor can maintain their families in dear
      years, they must be at their ease in times of moderate plenty, and in
      affluence in those of extraordinary cheapness. The high price of
      provisions during these ten years past, has not, in many parts of the
      kingdom, been accompanied with any sensible rise in the money price of
      labour. It has, indeed, in some; owing, probably, more to the increase of
      the demand for labour, than to that of the price of provisions.  Thirdly, as the price of provisions varies more from year to year than the
      wages of labour, so, on the other hand, the wages of labour vary more from
      place to place than the price of provisions. The prices of bread and
      butchers’ meat are generally the same, or very nearly the same, through
      the greater part of the united kingdom. These, and most other things which
      are sold by retail, the way in which the labouring poor buy all things,
      are generally fully as cheap, or cheaper, in great towns than in the
      remoter parts of the country, for reasons which I shall have occasion to
      explain hereafter. But the wages of labour in a great town and its
      neighbourhood are frequently a fourth or a fifth part, twenty or five-and—twenty
      per cent. higher than at a few miles distance. Eighteen pence a day may be
      reckoned the common price of labour in London and its neighbourhood. At a
      few miles distance, it falls to fourteen and fifteen pence. Tenpence may
      be reckoned its price in Edinburgh and its neighbourhood. At a few miles
      distance, it falls to eightpence, the usual price of common labour through
      the greater part of the low country of Scotland, where it varies a good
      deal less than in England. Such a difference of prices, which, it seems,
      is not always sufficient to transport a man from one parish to another,
      would necessarily occasion so great a transportation of the most bulky
      commodities, not only from one parish to another, but from one end of the
      kingdom, almost from one end of the world to the other, as would soon
      reduce them more nearly to a level. After all that has been said of the
      levity and inconstancy of human nature, it appears evidently from
      experience, that man is, of all sorts of luggage, the most difficult to be
      transported. If the labouring poor, therefore, can maintain their families
      in those parts of the kingdom where the price of labour is lowest, they
      must be in affluence where it is highest.  Fourthly, the variations in the price of labour not only do not
      correspond, either in place or time, with those in the price of
      provisions, but they are frequently quite opposite.  Grain, the food of the common people, is dearer in Scotland than in
      England, whence Scotland receives almost every year very large supplies.
      But English corn must be sold dearer in Scotland, the country to which it
      is brought, than in England, the country from which it comes; and in
      proportion to its quality it cannot be sold dearer in Scotland than the
      Scotch corn that comes to the same market in competition with it. The
      quality of grain depends chiefly upon the quantity of flour or meal which
      it yields at the mill; and, in this respect, English grain is so much
      superior to the Scotch, that though often dearer in appearance, or in
      proportion to the measure of its bulk, it is generally cheaper in reality,
      or in proportion to its quality, or even to the measure of its weight. The
      price of labour, on the contrary, is dearer in England than in Scotland.
      If the labouring poor, therefore, can maintain their families in the one
      part of the united kingdom, they must be in affluence in the other.
      Oatmeal, indeed, supplies the common people in Scotland with the greatest
      and the best part of their food, which is, in general, much inferior to
      that of their neighbours of the same rank in England. This difference,
      however, in the mode of their subsistence, is not the cause, but the
      effect, of the difference in their wages; though, by a strange
      misapprehension, I have frequently heard it represented as the cause. It
      is not because one man keeps a coach, while his neighbour walks a-foot,
      that the one is rich, and the other poor; but because the one is rich, he
      keeps a coach, and because the other is poor, he walks a-foot.  During the course of the last century, taking one year with another, grain
      was dearer in both parts of the united kingdom than during that of the
      present. This is a matter of fact which cannot now admit of any reasonable
      doubt; and the proof of it is, if possible, still more decisive with
      regard to Scotland than with regard to England. It is in Scotland
      supported by the evidence of the public fiars, annual valuations made upon
      oath, according to the actual state of the markets, of all the different
      sorts of grain in every different county of Scotland. If such direct proof
      could require any collateral evidence to confirm it, I would observe, that
      this has likewise been the case in France, and probably in most other
      parts of Europe. With regard to France, there is the clearest proof. But
      though it is certain, that in both parts of the united kingdom grain was
      somewhat dearer in the last century than in the present, it is equally
      certain that labour was much cheaper. If the labouring poor, therefore,
      could bring up their families then, they must be much more at their ease
      now. In the last century, the most usual day-wages of common labour
      through the greater part of Scotland were sixpence in summer, and
      fivepence in winter. Three shillings a-week, the same price, very nearly
      still continues to be paid in some parts of the Highlands and Western
      islands. Through the greater part of the Low country, the most usual wages
      of common labour are now eight pence a-day; tenpence, sometimes a
      shilling, about Edinburgh, in the counties which border upon England,
      probably on account of that neighbourhood, and in a few other places where
      there has lately been a considerable rise in the demand for labour, about
      Glasgow, Carron, Ayrshire, etc. In England, the improvements of
      agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, began much earlier than in
      Scotland. The demand for labour, and consequently its price, must
      necessarily have increased with those improvements. In the last century,
      accordingly, as well as in the present, the wages of labour were higher in
      England than in Scotland. They have risen, too, considerably since that
      time, though, on account of the greater variety of wages paid there in
      different places, it is more difficult to ascertain how much. In 1614, the
      pay of a foot soldier was the same as in the present times, eightpence
      a-day. When it was first established, it would naturally be regulated by
      the usual wages of common labourers, the rank of people from which foot
      soldiers are commonly drawn. Lord-chief-justice Hales, who wrote in the
      time of Charles II. computes the necessary expense of a labourer’s family,
      consisting of six persons, the father and mother, two children able to do
      something, and two not able, at ten shillings a-week, or twenty-six pounds
      a-year. If they cannot earn this by their labour, they must make it up, he
      supposes, either by begging or stealing. He appears to have enquired very
      carefully into this subject {See his scheme for the maintenance of the
      poor, in Burn’s History of the Poor Laws.}. In 1688, Mr Gregory King,
      whose skill in political arithmetic is so much extolled by Dr Davenant,
      computed the ordinary income of labourers and out-servants to be fifteen
      pounds a-year to a family, which he supposed to consist, one with another,
      of three and a half persons. His calculation, therefore, though different
      in appearance, corresponds very nearly at bottom with that of Judge Hales.
      Both suppose the weekly expense of such families to be about twenty-pence
      a-head. Both the pecuniary income and expense of such families have
      increased considerably since that time through the greater part of the
      kingdom, in some places more, and in some less, though perhaps scarce
      anywhere so much as some exaggerated accounts of the present wages of
      labour have lately represented them to the public. The price of labour, it
      must be observed, cannot be ascertained very accurately anywhere,
      different prices being often paid at the same place and for the same sort
      of labour, not only according to the different abilities of the workman,
      but according to the easiness or hardness of the masters. Where wages are
      not regulated by law, all that we can pretend to determine is, what are
      the most usual; and experience seems to shew that law can never regulate
      them properly, though it has often pretended to do so.  The real recompence of labour, the real quantity of the necessaries and
      conveniencies of life which it can procure to the labourer, has, during
      the course of the present century, increased perhaps in a still greater
      proportion than its money price. Not only grain has become somewhat
      cheaper, but many other things, from which the industrious poor derive an
      agreeable and wholesome variety of food, have become a great deal cheaper.
      Potatoes, for example, do not at present, through the greater part of the
      kingdom, cost half the price which they used to do thirty or forty years
      ago. The same thing may be said of turnips, carrots, cabbages; things
      which were formerly never raised but by the spade, but which are now
      commonly raised by the plough. All sort of garden stuff, too, has become
      cheaper. The greater part of the apples, and even of the onions, consumed
      in Great Britain, were, in the last century, imported from Flanders. The
      great improvements in the coarser manufactories of both linen and woollen
      cloth furnish the labourers with cheaper and better clothing; and those in
      the manufactories of the coarser metals, with cheaper and better
      instruments of trade, as well as with many agreeable and convenient pieces
      of household furniture. Soap, salt, candles, leather, and fermented
      liquors, have, indeed, become a good deal dearer, chiefly from the taxes
      which have been laid upon them. The quantity of these, however, which the
      labouring poor are under any necessity of consuming, is so very small, that
      the increase in their price does not compensate the diminution in that of
      so many other things. The common complaint, that luxury extends itself
      even to the lowest ranks of the people, and that the labouring poor will
      not now be contented with the same food, clothing, and lodging, which
      satisfied them in former times, may convince us that it is not the money
      price of labour only, but its real recompence, which has augmented.  Is this improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of the people
      to be regarded as an advantage, or as an inconveniency, to the society?
      The answer seems at first abundantly plain. Servants, labourers, and
      workmen of different kinds, make up the far greater part of every great
      political society. But what improves the circumstances of the greater
      part, can never be regarded as any inconveniency to the whole. No society
      can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the
      members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who
      feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the people, should have such a
      share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably
      well fed, clothed, and lodged.  Poverty, though it no doubt discourages, does not always prevent,
      marriage. It seems even to be favourable to generation. A half-starved
      Highland woman frequently bears more than twenty children, while a
      pampered fine lady is often incapable of bearing any, and is generally
      exhausted by two or three. Barrenness, so frequent among women of fashion,
      is very rare among those of inferior station. Luxury, in the fair sex,
      while it inflames, perhaps, the passion for enjoyment, seems always to
      weaken, and frequently to destroy altogether, the powers of generation.  But poverty, though it does not prevent the generation, is extremely
      unfavourable to the rearing of children. The tender plant is produced; but
      in so cold a soil, and so severe a climate, soon withers and dies. It is
      not uncommon, I have been frequently told, in the Highlands of Scotland,
      for a mother who has born twenty children not to have two alive. Several
      officers of great experience have assured me, that, so far from recruiting
      their regiment, they have never been able to supply it with drums and
      fifes, from all the soldiers’ children that were born in it. A greater
      number of fine children, however, is seldom seen anywhere than about a
      barrack of soldiers. Very few of them, it seems, arrive at the age of
      thirteen or fourteen. In some places, one half the children die before
      they are four years of age, in many places before they are seven, and in
      almost all places before they are nine or ten. This great mortality,
      however will everywhere be found chiefly among the children of the common
      people, who cannot afford to tend them with the same care as those of
      better station. Though their marriages are generally more fruitful than
      those of people of fashion, a smaller proportion of their children arrive
      at maturity. In foundling hospitals, and among the children brought up by
      parish charities, the mortality is still greater than among those of the
      common people.  Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to the means
      of their subsistence, and no species can ever multiply beyond it. But in
      civilized society, it is only among the inferior ranks of people that the
      scantiness of subsistence can set limits to the further multiplication of
      the human species; and it can do so in no other way than by destroying a
      great part of the children which their fruitful marriages produce.  The liberal reward of labour, by enabling them to provide better for their
      children, and consequently to bring up a greater number, naturally tends
      to widen and extend those limits. It deserves to be remarked, too, that it
      necessarily does this as nearly as possible in the proportion which the
      demand for labour requires. If this demand is continually increasing, the
      reward of labour must necessarily encourage in such a manner the marriage
      and multiplication of labourers, as may enable them to supply that
      continually increasing demand by a continually increasing population. If
      the reward should at any time be less than what was requisite for this
      purpose, the deficiency of hands would soon raise it; and if it should at
      any time be more, their excessive multiplication would soon lower it to
      this necessary rate. The market would be so much understocked with labour
      in the one case, and so much overstocked in the other, as would soon force
      back its price to that proper rate which the circumstances of the society
      required. It is in this manner that the demand for men, like that for any
      other commodity, necessarily regulates the production of men, quickens it
      when it goes on too slowly, and stops it when it advances too fast. It is
      this demand which regulates and determines the state of propagation in all
      the different countries of the world; in North America, in Europe, and in
      China; which renders it rapidly progressive in the first, slow and gradual
      in the second, and altogether stationary in the last.  The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expense of his
      master; but that of a free servant is at his own expense. The wear and
      tear of the latter, however, is, in reality, as much at the expense of his
      master as that of the former. The wages paid to journeymen and servants of
      every kind must be such as may enable them, one with another to continue
      the race of journeymen and servants, according as the increasing,
      diminishing, or stationary demand of the society, may happen to require.
      But though the wear and tear of a free servant be equally at the expense
      of his master, it generally costs him much less than that of a slave. The
      fund destined for replacing or repairing, if I may say so, the wear and
      tear of the slave, is commonly managed by a negligent master or careless
      overseer. That destined for performing the same office with regard to the
      freeman is managed by the freeman himself. The disorders which generally
      prevail in the economy of the rich, naturally introduce themselves into
      the management of the former; the strict frugality and parsimonious
      attention of the poor as naturally establish themselves in that of the
      latter. Under such different management, the same purpose must require
      very different degrees of expense to execute it. It appears, accordingly,
      from the experience of all ages and nations, I believe, that the work done
      by freemen comes cheaper in the end than that performed by slaves. It is
      found to do so even at Boston, New-York, and Philadelphia, where the wages
      of common labour are so very high.  The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the effect of increasing
      wealth, so it is the cause of increasing population. To complain of it, is
      to lament over the necessary cause and effect of the greatest public
      prosperity.  It deserves to be remarked, perhaps, that it is in the progressive state,
      while the society is advancing to the further acquisition, rather than
      when it has acquired its full complement of riches, that the condition of
      the labouring poor, of the great body of the people, seems to be the
      happiest and the most comfortable. It is hard in the stationary, and
      miserable in the declining state. The progressive state is, in reality,
      the cheerful and the hearty state to all the different orders of the
      society; the stationary is dull; the declining melancholy.  The liberal reward of labour, as it encourages the propagation, so it
      increases the industry of the common people. The wages of labour are the
      encouragement of industry, which, like every other human quality, improves
      in proportion to the encouragement it receives. A plentiful subsistence
      increases the bodily strength of the labourer, and the comfortable hope of
      bettering his condition, and of ending his days, perhaps, in ease and
      plenty, animates him to exert that strength to the utmost. Where wages are
      high, accordingly, we shall always find the workmen more active, diligent,
      and expeditious, than where they are low; in England, for example, than in
      Scotland; in the neighbourhood of great towns, than in remote country
      places. Some workmen, indeed, when they can earn in four days what will
      maintain them through the week, will be idle the other three. This,
      however, is by no means the case with the greater part. Workmen, on the
      contrary, when they are liberally paid by the piece, are very apt to
      overwork themselves, and to ruin their health and constitution in a few
      years. A carpenter in London, and in some other places, is not supposed to
      last in his utmost vigour above eight years. Something of the same kind
      happens in many other trades, in which the workmen are paid by the piece;
      as they generally are in manufactures, and even in country labour,
      wherever wages are higher than ordinary. Almost every class of artificers
      is subject to some peculiar infirmity occasioned by excessive application
      to their peculiar species of work. Ramuzzini, an eminent Italian
      physician, has written a particular book concerning such diseases. We do
      not reckon our soldiers the most industrious set of people among us; yet
      when soldiers have been employed in some particular sorts of work, and
      liberally paid by the piece, their officers have frequently been obliged
      to stipulate with the undertaker, that they should not be allowed to earn
      above a certain sum every day, according to the rate at which they were
      paid. Till this stipulation was made, mutual emulation, and the desire of
      greater gain, frequently prompted them to overwork themselves, and to hurt
      their health by excessive labour. Excessive application, during four days
      of the week, is frequently the real cause of the idleness of the other
      three, so much and so loudly complained of. Great labour, either of mind
      or body, continued for several days together is, in most men, naturally
      followed by a great desire of relaxation, which, if not restrained by
      force, or by some strong necessity, is almost irresistible. It is the call
      of nature, which requires to be relieved by some indulgence, sometimes of
      ease only, but sometimes too of dissipation and diversion. If it is not
      complied with, the consequences are often dangerous and sometimes fatal,
      and such as almost always, sooner or later, bring on the peculiar
      infirmity of the trade. If masters would always listen to the dictates of
      reason and humanity, they have frequently occasion rather to moderate,
      than to animate the application of many of their workmen. It will be
      found, I believe, in every sort of trade, that the man who works so
      moderately, as to be able to work constantly, not only preserves his
      health the longest, but, in the course of the year, executes the greatest
      quantity of work.  In cheap years it is pretended, workmen are generally more idle, and in
      dear times more industrious than ordinary. A plentiful subsistence,
      therefore, it has been concluded, relaxes, and a scanty one quickens their
      industry. That a little more plenty than ordinary may render some workmen
      idle, cannot be well doubted; but that it should have this effect upon the
      greater part, or that men in general should work better when they are ill
      fed, than when they are well fed, when they are disheartened than when
      they are in good spirits, when they are frequently sick than when they are
      generally in good health, seems not very probable. Years of dearth, it is
      to be observed, are generally among the common people years of sickness
      and mortality, which cannot fail to diminish the produce of their
      industry.  In years of plenty, servants frequently leave their masters, and trust
      their subsistence to what they can make by their own industry. But the
      same cheapness of provisions, by increasing the fund which is destined for
      the maintenance of servants, encourages masters, farmers especially, to
      employ a greater number. Farmers, upon such occasions, expect more profit
      from their corn by maintaining a few more labouring servants, than by
      selling it at a low price in the market. The demand for servants
      increases, while the number of those who offer to supply that demand
      diminishes. The price of labour, therefore, frequently rises in cheap
      years.  In years of scarcity, the difficulty and uncertainty of subsistence make
      all such people eager to return to service. But the high price of
      provisions, by diminishing the funds destined for the maintenance of
      servants, disposes masters rather to diminish than to increase the number
      of those they have. In dear years, too, poor independent workmen
      frequently consume the little stock with which they had used to supply
      themselves with the materials of their work, and are obliged to become
      journeymen for subsistence. More people want employment than easily get
      it; many are willing to take it upon lower terms than ordinary; and the
      wages of both servants and journeymen frequently sink in dear years.  Masters of all sorts, therefore, frequently make better bargains with
      their servants in dear than in cheap years, and find them more humble and
      dependent in the former than in the latter. They naturally, therefore,
      commend the former as more favourable to industry. Landlords and farmers,
      besides, two of the largest classes of masters, have another reason for
      being pleased with dear years. The rents of the one, and the profits of
      the other, depend very much upon the price of provisions. Nothing can be
      more absurd, however, than to imagine that men in general should work less
      when they work for themselves, than when they work for other people. A
      poor independent workman will generally be more industrious than even a
      journeyman who works by the piece. The one enjoys the whole produce of his
      own industry, the other shares it with his master. The one, in his
      separate independent state, is less liable to the temptations of bad
      company, which, in large manufactories, so frequently ruin the morals of
      the other. The superiority of the independent workman over those servants
      who are hired by the month or by the year, and whose wages and maintenance
      are the same, whether they do much or do little, is likely to be still
      greater. Cheap years tend to increase the proportion of independent
      workmen to journeymen and servants of all kinds, and dear years to
      diminish it.  A French author of great knowledge and ingenuity, Mr Messance, receiver of
      the tallies in the election of St Etienne, endeavours to shew that the
      poor do more work in cheap than in dear years, by comparing the quantity
      and value of the goods made upon those different occasions in three
      different manufactures; one of coarse woollens, carried on at Elbeuf; one
      of linen, and another of silk, both which extend through the whole
      generality of Rouen. It appears from his account, which is copied from the
      registers of the public offices, that the quantity and value of the goods
      made in all those three manufactories has generally been greater in cheap
      than in dear years, and that it has always been greatest in the cheapest,
      and least in the dearest years. All the three seem to be stationary
      manufactures, or which, though their produce may vary somewhat from year
      to year, are, upon the whole, neither going backwards nor forwards.  The manufacture of linen in Scotland, and that of coarse woollens in the
      West Riding of Yorkshire, are growing manufactures, of which the produce
      is generally, though with some variations, increasing both in quantity and
      value. Upon examining, however, the accounts which have been published of
      their annual produce, I have not been able to observe that its variations
      have had any sensible connection with the dearness or cheapness of the
      seasons. In 1740, a year of great scarcity, both manufactures, indeed,
      appear to have declined very considerably. But in 1756, another year of
      great scarcity, the Scotch manufactures made more than ordinary advances.
      The Yorkshire manufacture, indeed, declined, and its produce did not rise
      to what it had been in 1755, till 1766, after the repeal of the American
      stamp act. In that and the following year, it greatly exceeded what it had
      ever been before, and it has continued to advance ever since.  The produce of all great manufactures for distant sale must necessarily
      depend, not so much upon the dearness or cheapness of the seasons in the
      countries where they are carried on, as upon the circumstances which
      affect the demand in the countries where they are consumed; upon peace or
      war, upon the prosperity or declension of other rival manufactures and
      upon the good or bad humour of their principal customers. A great part of
      the extraordinary work, besides, which is probably done in cheap years,
      never enters the public registers of manufactures. The men-servants, who
      leave their masters, become independent labourers. The women return to
      their parents, and commonly spin, in order to make clothes for themselves
      and their families. Even the independent workmen do not always, work for
      public sale, but are employed by some of their neighbours in manufactures
      for family use. The produce of their labour, therefore, frequently makes
      no figure in those public registers, of which the records are sometimes
      published with so much parade, and from which our merchants and
      manufacturers would often vainly pretend to announce the prosperity or
      declension of the greatest empires.  Though the variations in the price of labour not only do not always
      correspond with those in the price of provisions, but are frequently quite
      opposite, we must not, upon this account, imagine that the price of
      provisions has no influence upon that of labour. The money price of labour
      is necessarily regulated by two circumstances; the demand for labour, and
      the price of the necessaries and conveniencies of life. The demand for
      labour, according as it happens to be increasing, stationary, or
      declining, or to require an increasing, stationary, or declining
      population, determines the quantities of the necessaries and conveniencies
      of life which must be given to the labourer; and the money price of labour
      is determined by what is requisite for purchasing this quantity. Though
      the money price of labour, therefore, is sometimes high where the price of
      provisions is low, it would be still higher, the demand continuing the
      same, if the price of provisions was high.  It is because the demand for labour increases in years of sudden and
      extraordinary plenty, and diminishes in those of sudden and extraordinary
      scarcity, that the money price of labour sometimes rises in the one, and
      sinks in the other.  In a year of sudden and extraordinary plenty, there are funds in the hands
      of many of the employers of industry, sufficient to maintain and employ a
      greater number of industrious people than had been employed the year
      before; and this extraordinary number cannot always be had. Those masters,
      therefore, who want more workmen, bid against one another, in order to get
      them, which sometimes raises both the real and the money price of their
      labour.  The contrary of this happens in a year of sudden and extraordinary
      scarcity. The funds destined for employing industry are less than they had
      been the year before. A considerable number of people are thrown out of
      employment, who bid one against another, in order to get it, which
      sometimes lowers both the real and the money price of labour. In 1740, a
      year of extraordinary scarcity, many people were willing to work for bare
      subsistence. In the succeeding years of plenty, it was more difficult to
      get labourers and servants. The scarcity of a dear year, by diminishing
      the demand for labour, tends to lower its price, as the high price of
      provisions tends to raise it. The plenty of a cheap year, on the contrary,
      by increasing the demand, tends to raise the price of labour, as the
      cheapness of provisions tends to lower it. In the ordinary variations of
      the prices of provisions, those two opposite causes seem to counterbalance
      one another, which is probably, in part, the reason why the wages of
      labour are everywhere so much more steady and permanent than the price of
      provisions.  The increase in the wages of labour necessarily increases the price of
      many commodities, by increasing that part of it which resolves itself into
      wages, and so far tends to diminish their consumption, both at home and
      abroad. The same cause, however, which raises the wages of labour, the
      increase of stock, tends to increase its productive powers, and to make a
      smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work. The owner
      of the stock which employs a great number of labourers necessarily
      endeavours, for his own advantage, to make such a proper division and
      distribution of employment, that they may be enabled to produce the
      greatest quantity of work possible. For the same reason, he endeavours to
      supply them with the best machinery which either he or they can think of.
      What takes place among the labourers in a particular workhouse, takes
      place, for the same reason, among those of a great society. The greater
      their number, the more they naturally divide themselves into different
      classes and subdivisions of employments. More heads are occupied in
      inventing the most proper machinery for executing the work of each, and it
      is, therefore, more likely to be invented. There are many commodities,
      therefore, which, in consequence of these improvements, come to be
      produced by so much less labour than before, that the increase of its
      price is more than compensated by the diminution of its quantity.    CHAPTER IX. OF THE PROFITS OF STOCK.  The rise and fall in the profits of stock depend upon the same causes with
      the rise and fall in the wages of labour, the increasing or declining
      state of the wealth of the society; but those causes affect the one and
      the other very differently.  The increase of stock, which raises wages, tends to lower profit. When the
      stocks of many rich merchants are turned into the same trade, their mutual
      competition naturally tends to lower its profit; and when there is a like
      increase of stock in all the different trades carried on in the same
      society, the same competition must produce the same effect in them all.  It is not easy, it has already been observed, to ascertain what are the
      average wages of labour, even in a particular place, and at a particular
      time. We can, even in this case, seldom determine more than what are the
      most usual wages. But even this can seldom be done with regard to the
      profits of stock. Profit is so very fluctuating, that the person who
      carries on a particular trade, cannot always tell you himself what is the
      average of his annual profit. It is affected, not only by every variation
      of price in the commodities which he deals in, but by the good or bad
      fortune both of his rivals and of his customers, and by a thousand other
      accidents, to which goods, when carried either by sea or by land, or even
      when stored in a warehouse, are liable. It varies, therefore, not only
      from year to year, but from day to day, and almost from hour to hour. To
      ascertain what is the average profit of all the different trades carried
      on in a great kingdom, must be much more difficult; and to judge of what
      it may have been formerly, or in remote periods of time, with any degree
      of precision, must be altogether impossible.  But though it may be impossible to determine, with any degree of
      precision, what are or were the average profits of stock, either in the
      present or in ancient times, some notion may be formed of them from the
      interest of money. It may be laid down as a maxim, that wherever a great
      deal can be made by the use of money, a great deal will commonly be given
      for the use of it; and that, wherever little can be made by it, less will
      commonly he given for it. Accordingly, therefore, as the usual market rate
      of interest varies in any country, we may be assured that the ordinary
      profits of stock must vary with it, must sink as it sinks, and rise as it
      rises. The progress of interest, therefore, may lead us to form some
      notion of the progress of profit.  By the 37th of Henry VIII. all interest above ten per cent. was declared
      unlawful. More, it seems, had sometimes been taken before that. In the
      reign of Edward VI. religious zeal prohibited all interest. This
      prohibition, however, like all others of the same kind, is said to have
      produced no effect, and probably rather increased than diminished the evil
      of usury. The statute of Henry VIII. was revived by the 13th of Elizabeth,
      cap. 8. and ten per cent. continued to be the legal rate of interest till
      the 21st of James I. when it was restricted to eight per cent. It was
      reduced to six per cent. soon after the Restoration, and by the 12th of
      Queen Anne, to five per cent. All these different statutory regulations
      seem to have been made with great propriety. They seem to have followed,
      and not to have gone before, the market rate of interest, or the rate at
      which people of good credit usually borrowed. Since the time of Queen
      Anne, five per cent. seems to have been rather above than below the market
      rate. Before the late war, the government borrowed at three per cent.; and
      people of good credit in the capital, and in many other parts of the
      kingdom, at three and a-half, four, and four and a-half per cent.  Since the time of Henry VIII. the wealth and revenue of the country have
      been continually advancing, and in the course of their progress, their
      pace seems rather to have been gradually accelerated than retarded. They
      seem not only to have been going on, but to have been going on faster and
      faster. The wages of labour have been continually increasing during the
      same period, and, in the greater part of the different branches of trade
      and manufactures, the profits of stock have been diminishing.  It generally requires a greater stock to carry on any sort of trade in a
      great town than in a country village. The great stocks employed in every
      branch of trade, and the number of rich competitors, generally reduce the
      rate of profit in the former below what it is in the latter. But the wages
      of labour are generally higher in a great town than in a country village.
      In a thriving town, the people who have great stocks to employ, frequently
      cannot get the number of workmen they want, and therefore bid against one
      another, in order to get as many as they can, which raises the wages of
      labour, and lowers the profits of stock. In the remote parts of the
      country, there is frequently not stock sufficient to employ all the
      people, who therefore bid against one another, in order to get employment,
      which lowers the wages of labour, and raises the profits of stock.  In Scotland, though the legal rate of interest is the same as in England,
      the market rate is rather higher. People of the best credit there seldom
      borrow under five per cent. Even private bankers in Edinburgh give four
      per cent. upon their promissory-notes, of which payment, either in whole
      or in part may be demanded at pleasure. Private bankers in London give no
      interest for the money which is deposited with them. There are few trades
      which cannot be carried on with a smaller stock in Scotland than in
      England. The common rate of profit, therefore, must be somewhat greater.
      The wages of labour, it has already been observed, are lower in Scotland
      than in England. The country, too, is not only much poorer, but the steps
      by which it advances to a better condition, for it is evidently advancing,
      seem to be much slower and more tardy. The legal rate of interest in
      France has not during the course of the present century, been always
      regulated by the market rate {See Denisart, Article Taux des Interests,
      tom. iii, p.13}. In 1720, interest was reduced from the twentieth to the
      fiftieth penny, or from five to two per cent. In 1724, it was raised to
      the thirtieth penny, or to three and a third per cent. In 1725, it was
      again raised to the twentieth penny, or to five per cent. In 1766, during
      the administration of Mr Laverdy, it was reduced to the twenty-fifth
      penny, or to four per cent. The Abbé Terray raised it afterwards to the
      old rate of five per cent. The supposed purpose of many of those violent
      reductions of interest was to prepare the way for reducing that of the
      public debts; a purpose which has sometimes been executed. France is,
      perhaps, in the present times, not so rich a country as England; and
      though the legal rate of interest has in France frequently been lower than
      in England, the market rate has generally been higher; for there, as in
      other countries, they have several very safe and easy methods of evading
      the law. The profits of trade, I have been assured by British merchants
      who had traded in both countries, are higher in France than in England;
      and it is no doubt upon this account, that many British subjects chuse
      rather to employ their capitals in a country where trade is in disgrace,
      than in one where it is highly respected. The wages of labour are lower in
      France than in England. When you go from Scotland to England, the
      difference which you may remark between the dress and countenance of the
      common people in the one country and in the other, sufficiently indicates
      the difference in their condition. The contrast is still greater when you
      return from France. France, though no doubt a richer country than
      Scotland, seems not to be going forward so fast. It is a common and even a
      popular opinion in the country, that it is going backwards; an opinion
      which I apprehend, is ill-founded, even with regard to France, but which
      nobody can possibly entertain with regard to Scotland, who sees the
      country now, and who saw it twenty or thirty years ago.  The province of Holland, on the other hand, in proportion to the extent of
      its territory and the number of its people, is a richer country than
      England. The government there borrow at two per cent. and private people
      of good credit at three. The wages of labour are said to be higher in
      Holland than in England, and the Dutch, it is well known, trade upon lower
      profits than any people in Europe. The trade of Holland, it has been
      pretended by some people, is decaying, and it may perhaps be true that
      some particular branches of it are so; but these symptoms seem to indicate
      sufficiently that there is no general decay. When profit diminishes,
      merchants are very apt to complain that trade decays, though the
      diminution of profit is the natural effect of its prosperity, or of a
      greater stock being employed in it than before. During the late war, the
      Dutch gained the whole carrying trade of France, of which they still
      retain a very large share. The great property which they possess both in
      French and English funds, about forty millions, it is said in the latter
      (in which, I suspect, however, there is a considerable exaggeration ), the
      great sums which they lend to private people, in countries where the rate
      of interest is higher than in their own, are circumstances which no doubt
      demonstrate the redundancy of their stock, or that it has increased beyond
      what they can employ with tolerable profit in the proper business of their
      own country; but they do not demonstrate that that business has decreased.
      As the capital of a private man, though acquired by a particular trade,
      may increase beyond what he can employ in it, and yet that trade continue
      to increase too, so may likewise the capital of a great nation.  In our North American and West Indian colonies, not only the wages of
      labour, but the interest of money, and consequently the profits of stock,
      are higher than in England. In the different colonies, both the legal and
      the market rate of interest run from six to eight percent. High wages of
      labour and high profits of stock, however, are things, perhaps, which
      scarce ever go together, except in the peculiar circumstances of new
      colonies. A new colony must always, for some time, be more understocked in
      proportion to the extent of its territory, and more underpeopled in
      proportion to the extent of its stock, than the greater part of other
      countries. They have more land than they have stock to cultivate. What
      they have, therefore, is applied to the cultivation only of what is most
      fertile and most favourably situated, the land near the sea-shore, and
      along the banks of navigable rivers. Such land, too, is frequently
      purchased at a price below the value even of its natural produce. Stock
      employed in the purchase and improvement of such lands, must yield a very
      large profit, and, consequently, afford to pay a very large interest. Its
      rapid accumulation in so profitable an employment enables the planter to
      increase the number of his hands faster than he can find them in a new
      settlement. Those whom he can find, therefore, are very liberally
      rewarded. As the colony increases, the profits of stock gradually
      diminish. When the most fertile and best situated lands have been all
      occupied, less profit can be made by the cultivation of what is inferior
      both in soil and situation, and less interest can be afforded for the
      stock which is so employed. In the greater part of our colonies,
      accordingly, both the legal and the market rate of interest have been
      considerably reduced during the course of the present century. As riches,
      improvement, and population, have increased, interest has declined. The
      wages of labour do not sink with the profits of stock. The demand for
      labour increases with the increase of stock, whatever be its profits; and
      after these are diminished, stock may not only continue to increase, but
      to increase much faster than before. It is with industrious nations, who
      are advancing in the acquisition of riches, as with industrious
      individuals. A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases
      faster than a small stock with great profits. Money, says the proverb,
      makes money. When you have got a little, it is often easy to get more. The
      great difficulty is to get that little. The connection between the
      increase of stock and that of industry, or of the demand for useful
      labour, has partly been explained already, but will be explained more
      fully hereafter, in treating of the accumulation of stock.  The acquisition of new territory, or of new branches of trade, may
      sometimes raise the profits of stock, and with them the interest of money,
      even in a country which is fast advancing in the acquisition of riches.
      The stock of the country, not being sufficient for the whole accession of
      business which such acquisitions present to the different people among
      whom it is divided, is applied to those particular branches only which
      afford the greatest profit. Part of what had before been employed in other
      trades, is necessarily withdrawn from them, and turned into some of the
      new and more profitable ones. In all those old trades, therefore, the
      competition comes to be less than before. The market comes to be less
      fully supplied with many different sorts of goods. Their price necessarily
      rises more or less, and yields a greater profit to those who deal in them,
      who can, therefore, afford to borrow at a higher interest. For some time
      after the conclusion of the late war, not only private people of the best
      credit, but some of the greatest companies in London, commonly borrowed at
      five per cent. who, before that, had not been used to pay more than four,
      and four and a half per cent. The great accession both of territory and
      trade by our acquisitions in North America and the West Indies, will
      sufficiently account for this, without supposing any diminution in the
      capital stock of the society. So great an accession of new business to be
      carried on by the old stock, must necessarily have diminished the quantity
      employed in a great number of particular branches, in which the
      competition being less, the profits must have been greater. I shall
      hereafter have occasion to mention the reasons which dispose me to believe
      that the capital stock of Great Britain was not diminished, even by the
      enormous expense of the late war.  The diminution of the capital stock of the society, or of the funds
      destined for the maintenance of industry, however, as it lowers the wages
      of labour, so it raises the profits of stock, and consequently the
      interest of money. By the wages of labour being lowered, the owners of
      what stock remains in the society can bring their goods at less expense to
      market than before; and less stock being employed in supplying the market
      than before, they can sell them dearer. Their goods cost them less, and
      they get more for them. Their profits, therefore, being augmented at both
      ends, can well afford a large interest. The great fortunes so suddenly and
      so easily acquired in Bengal and the other British settlements in the East
      Indies, may satisfy us, that as the wages of labour are very low, so the
      profits of stock are very high in those ruined countries. The interest of
      money is proportionably so. In Bengal, money is frequently lent to the
      farmers at forty, fifty, and sixty per cent. and the succeeding crop is
      mortgaged for the payment. As the profits which can afford such an
      interest must eat up almost the whole rent of the landlord, so such
      enormous usury must in its turn eat up the greater part of those profits.
      Before the fall of the Roman republic, a usury of the same kind seems to
      have been common in the provinces, under the ruinous administration of
      their proconsuls. The virtuous Brutus lent money in Cyprus at
      eight-and-forty per cent. as we learn from the letters of Cicero.  In a country which had acquired that full complement of riches which the
      nature of its soil and climate, and its situation with respect to other
      countries, allowed it to acquire, which could, therefore, advance no
      further, and which was not going backwards, both the wages of labour and
      the profits of stock would probably be very low. In a country fully
      peopled in proportion to what either its territory could maintain, or its
      stock employ, the competition for employment would necessarily be so great
      as to reduce the wages of labour to what was barely sufficient to keep up
      the number of labourers, and the country being already fully peopled, that
      number could never be augmented. In a country fully stocked in proportion
      to all the business it had to transact, as great a quantity of stock would
      be employed in every particular branch as the nature and extent of the
      trade would admit. The competition, therefore, would everywhere be as
      great, and, consequently, the ordinary profit as low as possible.  But, perhaps, no country has ever yet arrived at this degree of opulence.
      China seems to have been long stationary, and had, probably, long ago
      acquired that full complement of riches which is consistent with the
      nature of its laws and institutions. But this complement may be much
      inferior to what, with other laws and institutions, the nature of its
      soil, climate, and situation, might admit of. A country which neglects or
      despises foreign commerce, and which admits the vessel of foreign nations
      into one or two of its ports only, cannot transact the same quantity of
      business which it might do with different laws and institutions. In a
      country, too, where, though the rich, or the owners of large capitals,
      enjoy a good deal of security, the poor, or the owners of small capitals,
      enjoy scarce any, but are liable, under the pretence of justice, to be
      pillaged and plundered at any time by the inferior mandarins, the quantity
      of stock employed in all the different branches of business transacted
      within it, can never be equal to what the nature and extent of that
      business might admit. In every different branch, the oppression of the
      poor must establish the monopoly of the rich, who, by engrossing the whole
      trade to themselves, will be able to make very large profits. Twelve per
      cent. accordingly, is said to be the common interest of money in China,
      and the ordinary profits of stock must be sufficient to afford this large
      interest.  A defect in the law may sometimes raise the rate of interest considerably
      above what the condition of the country, as to wealth or poverty, would
      require. When the law does not enforce the performance of contracts, it
      puts all borrowers nearly upon the same footing with bankrupts, or people
      of doubtful credit, in better regulated countries. The uncertainty of
      recovering his money makes the lender exact the same usurious interest
      which is usually required from bankrupts. Among the barbarous nations who
      overran the western provinces of the Roman empire, the performance of
      contracts was left for many ages to the faith of the contracting parties.
      The courts of justice of their kings seldom intermeddled in it. The high
      rate of interest which took place in those ancient times, may, perhaps, be
      partly accounted for from this cause.  When the law prohibits interest altogether, it does not prevent it. Many
      people must borrow, and nobody will lend without such a consideration for
      the use of their money as is suitable, not only to what can be made by the
      use of it, but to the difficulty and danger of evading the law. The high
      rate of interest among all Mahometan nations is accounted for by M.
      Montesquieu, not from their poverty, but partly from this, and partly from
      the difficulty of recovering the money.  The lowest ordinary rate of profit must always be something more than what
      is sufficient to compensate the occasional losses to which every
      employment of stock is exposed. It is this surplus only which is neat or
      clear profit. What is called gross profit, comprehends frequently not only
      this surplus, but what is retained for compensating such extraordinary
      losses. The interest which the borrower can afford to pay is in proportion
      to the clear profit only. The lowest ordinary rate of interest must, in
      the same manner, be something more than sufficient to compensate the
      occasional losses to which lending, even with tolerable prudence, is
      exposed. Were it not, mere charity or friendship could be the only motives
      for lending.  In a country which had acquired its full complement of riches, where, in
      every particular branch of business, there was the greatest quantity of
      stock that could be employed in it, as the ordinary rate of clear profit
      would be very small, so the usual market rate of interest which could be
      afforded out of it would be so low as to render it impossible for any but
      the very wealthiest people to live upon the interest of their money. All
      people of small or middling fortunes would be obliged to superintend
      themselves the employment of their own stocks. It would be necessary that
      almost every man should be a man of business, or engage in some sort of
      trade. The province of Holland seems to be approaching near to this state.
      It is there unfashionable not to be a man of business. Necessity makes it
      usual for almost every man to be so, and custom everywhere regulates
      fashion. As it is ridiculous not to dress, so is it, in some measure, not
      to be employed like other people. As a man of a civil profession seems
      awkward in a camp or a garrison, and is even in some danger of being
      despised there, so does an idle man among men of business.  The highest ordinary rate of profit may be such as, in the price of the
      greater part of commodities, eats up the whole of what should go to the
      rent of the land, and leaves only what is sufficient to pay the labour of
      preparing and bringing them to market, according to the lowest rate at
      which labour can anywhere be paid, the bare subsistence of the labourer.
      The workman must always have been fed in some way or other while he was
      about the work, but the landlord may not always have been paid. The
      profits of the trade which the servants of the East India Company carry on
      in Bengal may not, perhaps, be very far from this rate.  The proportion which the usual market rate of interest ought to bear to
      the ordinary rate of clear profit, necessarily varies as profit rises or
      falls. Double interest is in Great Britain reckoned what the merchants
      call a good, moderate, reasonable profit; terms which, I apprehend, mean
      no more than a common and usual profit. In a country where the ordinary
      rate of clear profit is eight or ten per cent. it may be reasonable that
      one half of it should go to interest, wherever business is carried on with
      borrowed money. The stock is at the risk of the borrower, who, as it were,
      insures it to the lender; and four or five per cent. may, in the greater
      part of trades, be both a sufficient profit upon the risk of this
      insurance, and a sufficient recompence for the trouble of employing the
      stock. But the proportion between interest and clear profit might not be
      the same in countries where the ordinary rate of profit was either a good
      deal lower, or a good deal higher. If it were a good deal lower, one half
      of it, perhaps, could not be afforded for interest; and more might be
      afforded if it were a good deal higher.  In countries which are fast advancing to riches, the low rate of profit
      may, in the price of many commodities, compensate the high wages of
      labour, and enable those countries to sell as cheap as their less thriving
      neighbours, among whom the wages of labour may be lower.  In reality, high profits tend much more to raise the price of work than
      high wages. If, in the linen manufacture, for example, the wages of the
      different working people, the flax-dressers, the spinners, the weavers,
      etc. should all of them be advanced twopence a-day, it would be necessary
      to heighten the price of a piece of linen only by a number of twopences
      equal to the number of people that had been employed about it, multiplied
      by the number of days during which they had been so employed. That part of
      the price of the commodity which resolved itself into the wages, would,
      through all the different stages of the manufacture, rise only in
      arithmetical proportion to this rise of wages. But if the profits of all
      the different employers of those working people should be raised five per
      cent. that part of the price of the commodity which resolved itself into
      profit would, through all the different stages of the manufacture, rise in
      geometrical proportion to this rise of profit. The employer of the flax
      dressers would, in selling his flax, require an additional five per cent.
      upon the whole value of the materials and wages which he advanced to his
      workmen. The employer of the spinners would require an additional five per
      cent. both upon the advanced price of the flax, and upon the wages of the
      spinners. And the employer of the weavers would require alike five per
      cent. both upon the advanced price of the linen-yarn, and upon the wages
      of the weavers. In raising the price of commodities, the rise of wages
      operates in the same manner as simple interest does in the accumulation of
      debt. The rise of profit operates like compound interest. Our merchants
      and master manufacturers complain much of the bad effects of high wages in
      raising the price, and thereby lessening the sale of their goods, both at
      home and abroad. They say nothing concerning the bad effects of high
      profits; they are silent with regard to the pernicious effects of their
      own gains; they complain only of those of other people.    CHAPTER X. OF WAGES AND PROFIT IN THE DIFFERENT
EMPLOYMENTS OF LABOUR AND STOCK.  The whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the different employments
      of labour and stock, must, in the same neighbourhood, be either perfectly
      equal, or continually tending to equality. If, in the same neighbourhood,
      there was any employment evidently either more or less advantageous than
      the rest, so many people would crowd into it in the one case, and so many
      would desert it in the other, that its advantages would soon return to the
      level of other employments. This, at least, would be the case in a society
      where things were left to follow their natural course, where there was
      perfect liberty, and where every man was perfectly free both to choose
      what occupation he thought proper, and to change it as often as he thought
      proper. Every man’s interest would prompt him to seek the advantageous,
      and to shun the disadvantageous employment.  Pecuniary wages and profit, indeed, are everywhere in Europe extremely
      different, according to the different employments of labour and stock. But
      this difference arises, partly from certain circumstances in the
      employments themselves, which, either really, or at least in the
      imagination of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some, and
      counterbalance a great one in others, and partly from the policy of
      Europe, which nowhere leaves things at perfect liberty.  The particular consideration of those circumstances, and of that policy,
      will divide this Chapter into two parts.  PART I. Inequalities arising from the nature of the employments
      themselves.  The five following are the principal circumstances which, so far as I have
      been able to observe, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some
      employments, and counterbalance a great one in others. First, the
      agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments themselves; secondly,
      the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and expense of learning
      them; thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy of employment in them;
      fourthly, the small or great trust which must be reposed in those who
      exercise them; and, fifthly, the probability or improbability of success
      in them.  First, the wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness
      or dirtiness, the honourableness or dishonourableness, of the employment.
      Thus in most places, take the year round, a journeyman tailor earns less
      than a journeyman weaver. His work is much easier. A journeyman weaver
      earns less than a journeyman smith. His work is not always easier, but it
      is much cleanlier. A journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom
      earns so much in twelve hours, as a collier, who is only a labourer, does
      in eight. His work is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is
      carried on in day-light, and above ground. Honour makes a great part of
      the reward of all honourable professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all
      things considered, they are generally under-recompensed, as I shall
      endeavour to shew by and by. Disgrace has the contrary effect. The trade
      of a butcher is a brutal and an odious business; but it is in most places
      more profitable than the greater part of common trades. The most
      detestable of all employments, that of public executioner, is, in
      proportion to the quantity of work done, better paid than any common trade
      whatever.  Hunting and fishing, the most important employments of mankind in the rude
      state of society, become, in its advanced state, their most agreeable
      amusements, and they pursue for pleasure what they once followed from
      necessity. In the advanced state of society, therefore, they are all very
      poor people who follow as a trade, what other people pursue as a pastime.
      Fishermen have been so since the time of Theocritus. {See Idyllium xxi.}.
      A poacher is everywhere a very poor man in Great Britain. In countries
      where the rigour of the law suffers no poachers, the licensed hunter is
      not in a much better condition. The natural taste for those employments
      makes more people follow them, than can live comfortably by them; and the
      produce of their labour, in proportion to its quantity, comes always too
      cheap to market, to afford any thing but the most scanty subsistence to
      the labourers.  Disagreeableness and disgrace affect the profits of stock in the same
      manner as the wages of labour. The keeper of an inn or tavern, who is
      never master of his own house, and who is exposed to the brutality of
      every drunkard, exercises neither a very agreeable nor a very creditable
      business. But there is scarce any common trade in which a small stock
      yields so great a profit.  Secondly, the wages of labour vary with the easiness and cheapness, or the
      difficulty and expense, of learning the business.  When any expensive machine is erected, the extraordinary work to be
      performed by it before it is worn out, it must be expected, will replace
      the capital laid out upon it, with at least the ordinary profits. A man
      educated at the expense of much labour and time to any of those
      employments which require extraordinary dexterity and skill, may be
      compared to one of those expensive machines. The work which he learns to
      perform, it must be expected, over and above the usual wages of common
      labour, will replace to him the whole expense of his education, with at
      least the ordinary profits of an equally valuable capital. It must do this
      too in a reasonable time, regard being had to the very uncertain duration
      of human life, in the same manner as to the more certain duration of the
      machine.  The difference between the wages of skilled labour and those of common
      labour, is founded upon this principle.  The policy of Europe considers the labour of all mechanics, artificers,
      and manufacturers, as skilled labour; and that of all country labourers as
      common labour. It seems to suppose that of the former to be of a more nice
      and delicate nature than that of the latter. It is so perhaps in some
      cases; but in the greater part it is quite otherwise, as I shall endeavour
      to shew by and by. The laws and customs of Europe, therefore, in order to
      qualify any person for exercising the one species of labour, impose the
      necessity of an apprenticeship, though with different degrees of rigour in
      different places. They leave the other free and open to every body. During
      the continuance of the apprenticeship, the whole labour of the apprentice
      belongs to his master. In the meantime he must, in many cases, be
      maintained by his parents or relations, and, in almost all cases, must be
      clothed by them. Some money, too, is commonly given to the master for
      teaching him his trade. They who cannot give money, give time, or become
      bound for more than the usual number of years; a consideration which,
      though it is not always advantageous to the master, on account of the
      usual idleness of apprentices, is always disadvantageous to the
      apprentice. In country labour, on the contrary, the labourer, while he is
      employed about the easier, learns the more difficult parts of his
      business, and his own labour maintains him through all the different
      stages of his employment. It is reasonable, therefore, that in Europe the
      wages of mechanics, artificers, and manufacturers, should be somewhat
      higher than those of common labourers. They are so accordingly, and their
      superior gains make them, in most places, be considered as a superior rank
      of people. This superiority, however, is generally very small: the daily
      or weekly earnings of journeymen in the more common sorts of manufactures,
      such as those of plain linen and woollen cloth, computed at an average,
      are, in most places, very little more than the day-wages of common
      labourers. Their employment, indeed, is more steady and uniform, and the
      superiority of their earnings, taking the whole year together, may be
      somewhat greater. It seems evidently, however, to be no greater than what
      is sufficient to compensate the superior expense of their education.
      Education in the ingenious arts, and in the liberal professions, is still
      more tedious and expensive. The pecuniary recompence, therefore, of
      painters and sculptors, of lawyers and physicians, ought to be much more
      liberal; and it is so accordingly.  The profits of stock seem to be very little affected by the easiness or
      difficulty of learning the trade in which it is employed. All the
      different ways in which stock is commonly employed in great towns seem, in
      reality, to be almost equally easy and equally difficult to learn. One
      branch, either of foreign or domestic trade, cannot well be a much more
      intricate business than another.  Thirdly, the wages of labour in different occupations vary with the
      constancy or inconstancy of employment.  Employment is much more constant in some trades than in others. In the
      greater part of manufactures, a journeyman maybe pretty sure of employment
      almost every day in the year that he is able to work. A mason or
      bricklayer, on the contrary, can work neither in hard frost nor in foul
      weather, and his employment at all other times depends upon the occasional
      calls of his customers. He is liable, in consequence, to be frequently
      without any. What he earns, therefore, while he is employed, must not only
      maintain him while he is idle, but make him some compensation for those
      anxious and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious a
      situation must sometimes occasion. Where the computed earnings of the
      greater part of manufacturers, accordingly, are nearly upon a level with
      the day-wages of common labourers, those of masons and bricklayers are
      generally from one-half more to double those wages. Where common labourers
      earn four or five shillings a-week, masons and bricklayers frequently earn
      seven and eight; where the former earn six, the latter often earn nine and
      ten; and where the former earn nine and ten, as in London, the latter
      commonly earn fifteen and eighteen. No species of skilled labour, however,
      seems more easy to learn than that of masons and bricklayers. Chairmen in
      London, during the summer season, are said sometimes to be employed as
      bricklayers. The high wages of those workmen, therefore, are not so much
      the recompence of their skill, as the compensation for the inconstancy of
      their employment.  A house-carpenter seems to exercise rather a nicer and a more ingenious
      trade than a mason. In most places, however, for it is not universally so,
      his day-wages are somewhat lower. His employment, though it depends much,
      does not depend so entirely upon the occasional calls of his customers;
      and it is not liable to be interrupted by the weather.  When the trades which generally afford constant employment, happen in a
      particular place not to do so, the wages of the workmen always rise a good
      deal above their ordinary proportion to those of common labour. In London,
      almost all journeymen artificers are liable to be called upon and
      dismissed by their masters from day to day, and from week to week, in the
      same manner as day-labourers in other places. The lowest order of
      artificers, journeymen tailors, accordingly, earn their half-a-crown
      a-day, though eighteen pence may be reckoned the wages of common labour.
      In small towns and country villages, the wages of journeymen tailors
      frequently scarce equal those of common labour; but in London they are
      often many weeks without employment, particularly during the summer.  When the inconstancy of employment is combined with the hardship,
      disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes raises the wages
      of the most common labour above those of the most skilful artificers. A
      collier working by the piece is supposed, at Newcastle, to earn commonly
      about double, and, in many parts of Scotland, about three times, the wages
      of common labour. His high wages arise altogether from the hardship,
      disagreeableness, and dirtiness of his work. His employment may, upon most
      occasions, be as constant as he pleases. The coal-heavers in London
      exercise a trade which, in hardship, dirtiness, and disagreeableness,
      almost equals that of colliers; and, from the unavoidable irregularity in
      the arrivals of coal-ships, the employment of the greater part of them is
      necessarily very inconstant. If colliers, therefore, commonly earn double
      and triple the wages of common labour, it ought not to seem unreasonable
      that coal-heavers should sometimes earn four and five times those wages.
      In the inquiry made into their condition a few years ago, it was found
      that, at the rate at which they were then paid, they could earn from six
      to ten shillings a-day. Six shillings are about four times the wages of
      common labour in London; and, in every particular trade, the lowest common
      earnings may always be considered as those of the far greater number. How
      extravagant soever those earnings may appear, if they were more than
      sufficient to compensate all the disagreeable circumstances of the
      business, there would soon be so great a number of competitors, as, in a
      trade which has no exclusive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a
      lower rate.  The constancy or inconstancy of employment cannot affect the ordinary
      profits of stock in any particular trade. Whether the stock is or is not
      constantly employed, depends, not upon the trade, but the trader.  Fourthly, the wages of labour vary according to the small or great trust
      which must be reposed in the workmen.  The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere superior to those of
      many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much superior ingenuity, on
      account of the precious materials with which they are entrusted. We trust
      our health to the physician, our fortune, and sometimes our life and
      reputation, to the lawyer and attorney. Such confidence could not safely
      be reposed in people of a very mean or low condition. Their reward must be
      such, therefore, as may give them that rank in the society which so
      important a trust requires. The long time and the great expense which must
      be laid out in their education, when combined with this circumstance,
      necessarily enhance still further the price of their labour.  When a person employs only his own stock in trade, there is no trust; and
      the credit which he may get from other people, depends, not upon the
      nature of the trade, but upon their opinion of his fortune, probity and
      prudence. The different rates of profit, therefore, in the different
      branches of trade, cannot arise from the different degrees of trust
      reposed in the traders.  Fifthly, the wages of labour in different employments vary according to
      the probability or improbability of success in them.  The probability that any particular person shall ever be qualified for the
      employments to which he is educated, is very different in different
      occupations. In the greatest part of mechanic trades success is almost
      certain; but very uncertain in the liberal professions. Put your son
      apprentice to a shoemaker, there is little doubt of his learning to make a
      pair of shoes; but send him to study the law, it as at least twenty to one
      if he ever makes such proficiency as will enable him to live by the
      business. In a perfectly fair lottery, those who draw the prizes ought to
      gain all that is lost by those who draw the blanks. In a profession, where
      twenty fail for one that succeeds, that one ought to gain all that should
      have been gained by the unsuccessful twenty. The counsellor at law, who,
      perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to make something by his
      profession, ought to receive the retribution, not only of his own so
      tedious and expensive education, but of that of more than twenty others,
      who are never likely to make any thing by it. How extravagant soever the
      fees of counsellors at law may sometimes appear, their real retribution is
      never equal to this. Compute, in any particular place, what is likely to
      be annually gained, and what is likely to be annually spent, by all the
      different workmen in any common trade, such as that of shoemakers or
      weavers, and you will find that the former sum will generally exceed the
      latter. But make the same computation with regard to all the counsellors
      and students of law, in all the different Inns of Court, and you will find
      that their annual gains bear but a very small proportion to their annual
      expense, even though you rate the former as high, and the latter as low,
      as can well be done. The lottery of the law, therefore, is very far from
      being a perfectly fair lottery; and that as well as many other liberal and
      honourable professions, is, in point of pecuniary gain, evidently
      under-recompensed.  Those professions keep their level, however, with other occupations; and,
      notwithstanding these discouragements, all the most generous and liberal
      spirits are eager to crowd into them. Two different causes contribute to
      recommend them. First, the desire of the reputation which attends upon
      superior excellence in any of them; and, secondly, the natural confidence
      which every man has, more or less, not only in his own abilities, but in
      his own good fortune.  To excel in any profession, in which but few arrive at mediocrity, is the
      most decisive mark of what is called genius, or superior talents. The
      public admiration which attends upon such distinguished abilities makes
      always a part of their reward; a greater or smaller, in proportion as it
      is higher or lower in degree. It makes a considerable part of that reward
      in the profession of physic; a still greater, perhaps, in that of law; in
      poetry and philosophy it makes almost the whole.  There are some very agreeable and beautiful talents, of which the
      possession commands a certain sort of admiration, but of which the
      exercise, for the sake of gain, is considered, whether from reason or
      prejudice, as a sort of public prostitution. The pecuniary recompence,
      therefore, of those who exercise them in this manner, must be sufficient,
      not only to pay for the time, labour, and expense of acquiring the
      talents, but for the discredit which attends the employment of them as the
      means of subsistence. The exorbitant rewards of players, opera-singers,
      opera-dancers, etc. are founded upon those two principles; the rarity and
      beauty of the talents, and the discredit of employing them in this manner.
      It seems absurd at first sight, that we should despise their persons, and
      yet reward their talents with the most profuse liberality. While we do the
      one, however, we must of necessity do the other, Should the public opinion
      or prejudice ever alter with regard to such occupations, their pecuniary
      recompence would quickly diminish. More people would apply to them, and
      the competition would quickly reduce the price of their labour. Such
      talents, though far from being common, are by no means so rare as
      imagined. Many people possess them in great perfection, who disdain to
      make this use of them; and many more are capable of acquiring them, if any
      thing could be made honourably by them.  The over-weening conceit which the greater part of men have of their own
      abilities, is an ancient evil remarked by the philosophers and moralists
      of all ages. Their absurd presumption in their own good fortune has been
      less taken notice of. It is, however, if possible, still more universal.
      There is no man living, who, when in tolerable health and spirits, has not
      some share of it. The chance of gain is by every man more or less
      over-valued, and the chance of loss is by most men under-valued, and by
      scarce any man, who is in tolerable health and spirits, valued more than
      it is worth.  That the chance of gain is naturally overvalued, we may learn from the
      universal success of lotteries. The world neither ever saw, nor ever will
      see, a perfectly fair lottery, or one in which the whole gain compensated
      the whole loss; because the undertaker could make nothing by it. In the
      state lotteries, the tickets are really not worth the price which is paid
      by the original subscribers, and yet commonly sell in the market for
      twenty, thirty, and sometimes forty per cent. advance. The vain hopes of
      gaining some of the great prizes is the sole cause of this demand. The
      soberest people scarce look upon it as a folly to pay a small sum for the
      chance of gaining ten or twenty thousand pounds, though they know that
      even that small sum is perhaps twenty or thirty per cent. more than the
      chance is worth. In a lottery in which no prize exceeded twenty pounds,
      though in other respects it approached much nearer to a perfectly fair one
      than the common state lotteries, there would not be the same demand for
      tickets. In order to have a better chance for some of the great prizes,
      some people purchase several tickets; and others, small shares in a still
      greater number. There is not, however, a more certain proposition in
      mathematics, than that the more tickets you adventure upon, the more
      likely you are to be a loser. Adventure upon all the tickets in the
      lottery, and you lose for certain; and the greater the number of your
      tickets, the nearer you approach to this certainty.  That the chance of loss is frequently undervalued, and scarce ever valued
      more than it is worth, we may learn from the very moderate profit of
      insurers. In order to make insurance, either from fire or sea-risk, a
      trade at all, the common premium must be sufficient to compensate the
      common losses, to pay the expense of management, and to afford such a
      profit as might have been drawn from an equal capital employed in any
      common trade. The person who pays no more than this, evidently pays no
      more than the real value of the risk, or the lowest price at which he can
      reasonably expect to insure it. But though many people have made a little
      money by insurance, very few have made a great fortune; and, from this
      consideration alone, it seems evident enough that the ordinary balance of
      profit and loss is not more advantageous in this than in other common
      trades, by which so many people make fortunes. Moderate, however, as the
      premium of insurance commonly is, many people despise the risk too much to
      care to pay it. Taking the whole kingdom at an average, nineteen houses in
      twenty, or rather, perhaps, ninety-nine in a hundred, are not insured from
      fire. Sea-risk is more alarming to the greater part of people; and the
      proportion of ships insured to those not insured is much greater. Many
      sail, however, at all seasons, and even in time of war, without any
      insurance. This may sometimes, perhaps, be done without any imprudence.
      When a great company, or even a great merchant, has twenty or thirty ships
      at sea, they may, as it were, insure one another. The premium saved up on
      them all may more than compensate such losses as they are likely to meet
      with in the common course of chances. The neglect of insurance upon
      shipping, however, in the same manner as upon houses, is, in most cases,
      the effect of no such nice calculation, but of mere thoughtless rashness,
      and presumptuous contempt of the risk.  The contempt of risk, and the presumptuous hope of success, are in no
      period of life more active than at the age at which young people choose
      their professions. How little the fear of misfortune is then capable of
      balancing the hope of good luck, appears still more evidently in the
      readiness of the common people to enlist as soldiers, or to go to sea,
      than in the eagerness of those of better fashion to enter into what are
      called the liberal professions.  What a common soldier may lose is obvious enough. Without regarding the
      danger, however, young volunteers never enlist so readily as at the
      beginning of a new war; and though they have scarce any chance of
      preferment, they figure to themselves, in their youthful fancies, a
      thousand occasions of acquiring honour and distinction which never occur.
      These romantic hopes make the whole price of their blood. Their pay is
      less than that of common labourers, and, in actual service, their fatigues
      are much greater.  The lottery of the sea is not altogether so disadvantageous as that of the
      army. The son of a creditable labourer or artificer may frequently go to
      sea with his father’s consent; but if he enlists as a soldier, it is
      always without it. Other people see some chance of his making something by
      the one trade; nobody but himself sees any of his making any thing by the
      other. The great admiral is less the object of public admiration than the
      great general; and the highest success in the sea service promises a less
      brilliant fortune and reputation than equal success in the land. The same
      difference runs through all the inferior degrees of preferment in both. By
      the rules of precedency, a captain in the navy ranks with a colonel in the
      army; but he does not rank with him in the common estimation. As the great
      prizes in the lottery are less, the smaller ones must be more numerous.
      Common sailors, therefore, more frequently get some fortune and preferment
      than common soldiers; and the hope of those prizes is what principally
      recommends the trade. Though their skill and dexterity are much superior
      to that of almost any artificers; and though their whole life is one
      continual scene of hardship and danger; yet for all this dexterity and
      skill, for all those hardships and dangers, while they remain in the
      condition of common sailors, they receive scarce any other recompence but
      the pleasure of exercising the one and of surmounting the other. Their
      wages are not greater than those of common labourers at the port which
      regulates the rate of seamen’s wages. As they are continually going from
      port to port, the monthly pay of those who sail from all the different
      ports of Great Britain, is more nearly upon a level than that of any other
      workmen in those different places; and the rate of the port to and from
      which the greatest number sail, that is, the port of London, regulates
      that of all the rest. At London, the wages of the greater part of the
      different classes of workmen are about double those of the same classes at
      Edinburgh. But the sailors who sail from the port of London, seldom earn
      above three or four shillings a month more than those who sail from the
      port of Leith, and the difference is frequently not so great. In time of
      peace, and in the merchant-service, the London price is from a guinea to
      about seven-and-twenty shillings the calendar month. A common labourer in
      London, at the rate of nine or ten shillings a week, may earn in the
      calendar month from forty to five-and-forty shillings. The sailor, indeed,
      over and above his pay, is supplied with provisions. Their value, however,
      may not perhaps always exceed the difference between his pay and that of
      the common labourer; and though it sometimes should, the excess will not
      be clear gain to the sailor, because he cannot share it with his wife and
      family, whom he must maintain out of his wages at home.  The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a life of adventures, instead of
      disheartening young people, seem frequently to recommend a trade to them.
      A tender mother, among the inferior ranks of people, is often afraid to
      send her son to school at a sea-port town, lest the sight of the ships,
      and the conversation and adventures of the sailors, should entice him to
      go to sea. The distant prospect of hazards, from which we can hope to
      extricate ourselves by courage and address, is not disagreeable to us, and
      does not raise the wages of labour in any employment. It is otherwise with
      those in which courage and address can be of no avail. In trades which are
      known to be very unwholesome, the wages of labour are always remarkably
      high. Unwholesomeness is a species of disagreeableness, and its effects
      upon the wages of labour are to be ranked under that general head.  In all the different employments of stock, the ordinary rate of profit
      varies more or less with the certainty or uncertainty of the returns.
      These are, in general, less uncertain in the inland than in the foreign
      trade, and in some branches of foreign trade than in others; in the trade
      to North America, for example, than in that to Jamaica. The ordinary rate
      of profit always rises more or less with the risk. It does not, however,
      seem to rise in proportion to it, or so as to compensate it completely.
      Bankruptcies are most frequent in the most hazardous trades. The most
      hazardous of all trades, that of a smuggler, though, when the adventure
      succeeds, it is likewise the most profitable, is the infallible road to
      bankruptcy. The presumptuous hope of success seems to act here as upon all
      other occasions, and to entice so many adventurers into those hazardous
      trades, that their competition reduces the profit below what is sufficient
      to compensate the risk. To compensate it completely, the common returns
      ought, over and above the ordinary profits of stock, not only to make up
      for all occasional losses, but to afford a surplus profit to the
      adventurers, of the same nature with the profit of insurers. But if the
      common returns were sufficient for all this, bankruptcies would not be
      more frequent in these than in other trades.  Of the five circumstances, therefore, which vary the wages of labour, two
      only affect the profits of stock; the agreeableness or disagreeableness of
      the business, and the risk or security with which it is attended. In point
      of agreeableness or disagreeableness, there is little or no difference in
      the far greater part of the different employments of stock, but a great
      deal in those of labour; and the ordinary profit of stock, though it rises
      with the risk, does not always seem to rise in proportion to it. It should
      follow from all this, that, in the same society or neighbourhood, the
      average and ordinary rates of profit in the different employments of stock
      should be more nearly upon a level than the pecuniary wages of the
      different sorts of labour.  They are so accordingly. The difference between the earnings of a common
      labourer and those of a well employed lawyer or physician, is evidently
      much greater than that between the ordinary profits in any two different
      branches of trade. The apparent difference, besides, in the profits of
      different trades, is generally a deception arising from our not always
      distinguishing what ought to be considered as wages, from what ought to be
      considered as profit.  Apothecaries’ profit is become a bye-word, denoting something uncommonly
      extravagant. This great apparent profit, however, is frequently no more
      than the reasonable wages of labour. The skill of an apothecary is a much
      nicer and more delicate matter than that of any artificer whatever; and
      the trust which is reposed in him is of much greater importance. He is the
      physician of the poor in all cases, and of the rich when the distress or
      danger is not very great. His reward, therefore, ought to be suitable to
      his skill and his trust; and it arises generally from the price at which
      he sells his drugs. But the whole drugs which the best employed apothecary
      in a large market-town, will sell in a year, may not perhaps cost him
      above thirty or forty pounds. Though he should sell them, therefore, for
      three or four hundred, or at a thousand per cent. profit, this may
      frequently be no more than the reasonable wages of his labour, charged, in
      the only way in which he can charge them, upon the price of his drugs. The
      greater part of the apparent profit is real wages disguised in the garb of
      profit.  In a small sea-port town, a little grocer will make forty or fifty per
      cent. upon a stock of a single hundred pounds, while a considerable
      wholesale merchant in the same place will scarce make eight or ten per
      cent. upon a stock of ten thousand. The trade of the grocer may be
      necessary for the conveniency of the inhabitants, and the narrowness of
      the market may not admit the employment of a larger capital in the
      business. The man, however, must not only live by his trade, but live by
      it suitably to the qualifications which it requires. Besides possessing a
      little capital, he must be able to read, write, and account and must be a
      tolerable judge, too, of perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods,
      their prices, qualities, and the markets where they are to be had
      cheapest. He must have all the knowledge, in short, that is necessary for
      a great merchant, which nothing hinders him from becoming but the want of
      a sufficient capital. Thirty or forty pounds a year cannot be considered
      as too great a recompence for the labour of a person so accomplished.
      Deduct this from the seemingly great profits of his capital, and little
      more will remain, perhaps, than the ordinary profits of stock. The greater
      part of the apparent profit is, in this case too, real wages.  The difference between the apparent profit of the retail and that of the
      wholesale trade, is much less in the capital than in small towns and
      country villages. Where ten thousand pounds can be employed in the grocery
      trade, the wages of the grocer’s labour must be a very trifling addition
      to the real profits of so great a stock. The apparent profits of the
      wealthy retailer, therefore, are there more nearly upon a level with those
      of the wholesale merchant. It is upon this account that goods sold by
      retail are generally as cheap, and frequently much cheaper, in the capital
      than in small towns and country villages. Grocery goods, for example, are
      generally much cheaper; bread and butchers’ meat frequently as cheap. It
      costs no more to bring grocery goods to the great town than to the country
      village; but it costs a great deal more to bring corn and cattle, as the
      greater part of them must be brought from a much greater distance. The
      prime cost of grocery goods, therefore, being the same in both places,
      they are cheapest where the least profit is charged upon them. The prime
      cost of bread and butchers’ meat is greater in the great town than in the
      country village; and though the profit is less, therefore they are not
      always cheaper there, but often equally cheap. In such articles as bread
      and butchers’ meat, the same cause which diminishes apparent profit,
      increases prime cost. The extent of the market, by giving employment to
      greater stocks, diminishes apparent profit; but by requiring supplies from
      a greater distance, it increases prime cost. This diminution of the one
      and increase of the other, seem, in most cases, nearly to counterbalance
      one another; which is probably the reason that, though the prices of corn
      and cattle are commonly very different in different parts of the kingdom,
      those of bread and butchers’ meat are generally very nearly the same
      through the greater part of it.  Though the profits of stock, both in the wholesale and retail trade, are
      generally less in the capital than in small towns and country villages,
      yet great fortunes are frequently acquired from small beginnings in the
      former, and scarce ever in the latter. In small towns and country
      villages, on account of the narrowness of the market, trade cannot always
      be extended as stock extends. In such places, therefore, though the rate
      of a particular person’s profits may be very high, the sum or amount of
      them can never be very great, nor consequently that of his annual
      accumulation. In great towns, on the contrary, trade can be extended as
      stock increases, and the credit of a frugal and thriving man increases
      much faster than his stock. His trade is extended in proportion to the
      amount of both; and the sum or amount of his profits is in proportion to
      the extent of his trade, and his annual accumulation in proportion to the
      amount of his profits. It seldom happens, however, that great fortunes are
      made, even in great towns, by any one regular, established, and well-known
      branch of business, but in consequence of a long life of industry,
      frugality, and attention. Sudden fortunes, indeed, are sometimes made in
      such places, by what is called the trade of speculation. The speculative
      merchant exercises no one regular, established, or well-known branch of
      business. He is a corn merchant this year, and a wine merchant the next,
      and a sugar, tobacco, or tea merchant the year after. He enters into every
      trade, when he foresees that it is likely to be more than commonly
      profitable, and he quits it when he foresees that its profits are likely
      to return to the level of other trades. His profits and losses, therefore,
      can bear no regular proportion to those of any one established and
      well-known branch of business. A bold adventurer may sometimes acquire a
      considerable fortune by two or three successful speculations, but is just
      as likely to lose one by two or three unsuccessful ones. This trade can be
      carried on nowhere but in great towns. It is only in places of the most
      extensive commerce and correspondence that the intelligence requisite for
      it can be had.  The five circumstances above mentioned, though they occasion considerable
      inequalities in the wages of labour and profits of stock, occasion none in
      the whole of the advantages and disadvantages, real or imaginary, of the
      different employments of either. The nature of those circumstances is
      such, that they make up for a small pecuniary gain in some, and
      counterbalance a great one in others.  In order, however, that this equality may take place in the whole of their
      advantages or disadvantages, three things are requisite, even where there
      is the most perfect freedom. First the employments must be well known and
      long established in the neighbourhood; secondly, they must be in their
      ordinary, or what may be called their natural state; and, thirdly, they
      must be the sole or principal employments of those who occupy them.  First, this equality can take place only in those employments which are
      well known, and have been long established in the neighbourhood.  Where all other circumstances are equal, wages are generally higher in new
      than in old trades. When a projector attempts to establish a new
      manufacture, he must at first entice his workmen from other employments,
      by higher wages than they can either earn in their own trades, or than the
      nature of his work would otherwise require; and a considerable time must
      pass away before he can venture to reduce them to the common level.
      Manufactures for which the demand arises altogether from fashion and
      fancy, are continually changing, and seldom last long enough to be
      considered as old established manufactures. Those, on the contrary, for
      which the demand arises chiefly from use or necessity, are less liable to
      change, and the same form or fabric may continue in demand for whole
      centuries together. The wages of labour, therefore, are likely to be
      higher in manufactures of the former, than in those of the latter kind.
      Birmingham deals chiefly in manufactures of the former kind; Sheffield in
      those of the latter; and the wages of labour in those two different places
      are said to be suitable to this difference in the nature of their
      manufactures.  The establishment of any new manufacture, of any new branch of commerce,
      or of any new practice in agriculture, is always a speculation from which
      the projector promises himself extraordinary profits. These profits
      sometimes are very great, and sometimes, more frequently, perhaps, they
      are quite otherwise; but, in general, they bear no regular proportion to
      those of other old trades in the neighbourhood. If the project succeeds,
      they are commonly at first very high. When the trade or practice becomes
      thoroughly established and well known, the competition reduces them to the
      level of other trades.  Secondly, this equality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages
      of the different employments of labour and stock, can take place only in
      the ordinary, or what may be called the natural state of those
      employments.  The demand for almost every different species of labour is sometimes
      greater, and sometimes less than usual. In the one case, the advantages of
      the employment rise above, in the other they fall below the common level.
      The demand for country labour is greater at hay-time and harvest than
      during the greater part of the year; and wages rise with the demand. In
      time of war, when forty or fifty thousand sailors are forced from the
      merchant service into that of the king, the demand for sailors to merchant
      ships necessarily rises with their scarcity; and their wages, upon such
      occasions, commonly rise from a guinea and seven-and-twenty shillings to
      forty shillings and three pounds a-month. In a decaying manufacture, on
      the contrary, many workmen, rather than quit their own trade, are
      contented with smaller wages than would otherwise be suitable to the
      nature of their employment.  The profits of stock vary with the price of the commodities in which it is
      employed. As the price of any commodity rises above the ordinary or
      average rate, the profits of at least some part of the stock that is
      employed in bringing it to market, rise above their proper level, and as
      it falls they sink below it. All commodities are more or less liable to
      variations of price, but some are much more so than others. In all
      commodities which are produced by human industry, the quantity of industry
      annually employed is necessarily regulated by the annual demand, in such a
      manner that the average annual produce may, as nearly as possible, be
      equal to the average annual consumption. In some employments, it has
      already been observed, the same quantity of industry will always produce
      the same, or very nearly the same quantity of commodities. In the linen or
      woollen manufactures, for example, the same number of hands will annually
      work up very nearly the same quantity of linen and woollen cloth. The
      variations in the market price of such commodities, therefore, can arise
      only from some accidental variation in the demand. A public mourning
      raises the price of black cloth. But as the demand for most sorts of plain
      linen and woollen cloth is pretty uniform, so is likewise the price. But
      there are other employments in which the same quantity of industry will
      not always produce the same quantity of commodities. The same quantity of
      industry, for example, will, in different years, produce very different
      quantities of corn, wine, hops, sugar tobacco, etc. The price of such
      commodities, therefore, varies not only with the variations of demand, but
      with the much greater and more frequent variations of quantity, and is
      consequently extremely fluctuating; but the profit of some of the dealers
      must necessarily fluctuate with the price of the commodities. The
      operations of the speculative merchant are principally employed about such
      commodities. He endeavours to buy them up when he foresees that their
      price is likely to rise, and to sell them when it is likely to fall.  Thirdly, this equality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of
      the different employments of labour and stock, can take place only in such
      as are the sole or principal employments of those who occupy them.  When a person derives his subsistence from one employment, which does not
      occupy the greater part of his time, in the intervals of his leisure he is
      often willing to work at another for less wages than would otherwise suit
      the nature of the employment.  There still subsists, in many parts of Scotland, a set of people called
      cottars or cottagers, though they were more frequent some years ago than
      they are now. They are a sort of out-servants of the landlords and
      farmers. The usual reward which they receive from their master is a house,
      a small garden for pot-herbs, as much grass as will feed a cow, and,
      perhaps, an acre or two of bad arable land. When their master has occasion
      for their labour, he gives them, besides, two pecks of oatmeal a-week,
      worth about sixteen pence sterling. During a great part of the year, he
      has little or no occasion for their labour, and the cultivation of their
      own little possession is not sufficient to occupy the time which is left
      at their own disposal. When such occupiers were more numerous than they
      are at present, they are said to have been willing to give their spare
      time for a very small recompence to any body, and to have wrought for less
      wages than other labourers. In ancient times, they seem to have been
      common all over Europe. In countries ill cultivated, and worse inhabited,
      the greater part of landlords and farmers could not otherwise provide
      themselves with the extraordinary number of hands which country labour
      requires at certain seasons. The daily or weekly recompence which such
      labourers occasionally received from their masters, was evidently not the
      whole price of their labour. Their small tenement made a considerable part
      of it. This daily or weekly recompence, however, seems to have been
      considered as the whole of it, by many writers who have collected the
      prices of labour and provisions in ancient times, and who have taken
      pleasure in representing both as wonderfully low.  The produce of such labour comes frequently cheaper to market than would
      otherwise be suitable to its nature. Stockings, in many parts of Scotland,
      are knit much cheaper than they can anywhere be wrought upon the loom.
      They are the work of servants and labourers who derive the principal part
      of their subsistence from some other employment. More than a thousand pair
      of Shetland stockings are annually imported into Leith, of which the price
      is from fivepence to seven-pence a pair. At Lerwick, the small capital of
      the Shetland islands, tenpence a-day, I have been assured, is a common
      price of common labour. In the same islands, they knit worsted stockings
      to the value of a guinea a pair and upwards.  The spinning of linen yarn is carried on in Scotland nearly in the same
      way as the knitting of stockings, by servants, who are chiefly hired for
      other purposes. They earn but a very scanty subsistence, who endeavour to
      get their livelihood by either of those trades. In most parts of Scotland,
      she is a good spinner who can earn twentypence a-week.  In opulent countries, the market is generally so extensive, that any one
      trade is sufficient to employ the whole labour and stock of those who
      occupy it. Instances of people living by one employment, and, at the same
      time, deriving some little advantage from another, occur chiefly in poor
      countries. The following instance, however, of something of the same kind,
      is to be found in the capital of a very rich one. There is no city in
      Europe, I believe, in which house-rent is dearer than in London, and yet I
      know no capital in which a furnished apartment can be hired so cheap.
      Lodging is not only much cheaper in London than in Paris; it is much
      cheaper than in Edinburgh, of the same degree of goodness; and, what may
      seem extraordinary, the dearness of house-rent is the cause of the
      cheapness of lodging. The dearness of house-rent in London arises, not
      only from those causes which render it dear in all great capitals, the
      dearness of labour, the dearness of all the materials of building, which
      must generally be brought from a great distance, and, above all, the
      dearness of ground-rent, every landlord acting the part of a monopolist,
      and frequently exacting a higher rent for a single acre of bad land in a
      town, than can be had for a hundred of the best in the country; but it
      arises in part from the peculiar manners and customs of the people, which
      oblige every master of a family to hire a whole house from top to bottom.
      A dwelling-house in England means every thing that is contained under the
      same roof. In France, Scotland, and many other parts of Europe, it
      frequently means no more than a single storey. A tradesman in London is
      obliged to hire a whole house in that part of the town where his customers
      live. His shop is upon the ground floor, and he and his family sleep in
      the garret; and he endeavours to pay a part of his house-rent by letting
      the two middle storeys to lodgers. He expects to maintain his family by
      his trade, and not by his lodgers. Whereas at Paris and Edinburgh, people
      who let lodgings have commonly no other means of subsistence; and the
      price of the lodging must pay, not only the rent of the house, but the
      whole expense of the family.  PART II.—Inequalities occasioned by the Policy of Europe.  Such are the inequalities in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages
      of the different employments of labour and stock, which the defect of any
      of the three requisites above mentioned must occasion, even where there is
      the most perfect liberty. But the policy of Europe, by not leaving things
      at perfect liberty, occasions other inequalities of much greater
      importance.  It does this chiefly in the three following ways. First, by restraining
      the competition in some employments to a smaller number than would
      otherwise be disposed to enter into them; secondly, by increasing it in
      others beyond what it naturally would be; and, thirdly, by obstructing the
      free circulation of labour and stock, both from employment to employment,
      and from place to place.  First, The policy of Europe occasions a very important inequality in the
      whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the different employments of
      labour and stock, by restraining the competition in some employments to a
      smaller number than might otherwise be disposed to enter into them.  The exclusive privileges of corporations are the principal means it makes
      use of for this purpose.  The exclusive privilege of an incorporated trade necessarily restrains the
      competition, in the town where it is established, to those who are free of
      the trade. To have served an apprenticeship in the town, under a master
      properly qualified, is commonly the necessary requisite for obtaining this
      freedom. The bye-laws of the corporation regulate sometimes the number of
      apprentices which any master is allowed to have, and almost always the
      number of years which each apprentice is obliged to serve. The intention
      of both regulations is to restrain the competition to a much smaller
      number than might otherwise be disposed to enter into the trade. The
      limitation of the number of apprentices restrains it directly. A long term
      of apprenticeship restrains it more indirectly, but as effectually, by
      increasing the expense of education.  In Sheffield, no master cutler can have more than one apprentice at a
      time, by a bye-law of the corporation. In Norfolk and Norwich, no master
      weaver can have more than two apprentices, under pain of forfeiting five
      pounds a-month to the king. No master hatter can have more than two
      apprentices anywhere in England, or in the English plantations, under pain
      of forfeiting; five pounds a-month, half to the king, and half to him who
      shall sue in any court of record. Both these regulations, though they have
      been confirmed by a public law of the kingdom, are evidently dictated by
      the same corporation-spirit which enacted the bye-law of Sheffield. The
      silk-weavers in London had scarce been incorporated a year, when they
      enacted a bye-law, restraining any master from having more than two
      apprentices at a time. It required a particular act of parliament to
      rescind this bye-law.  Seven years seem anciently to have been, all over Europe, the usual term
      established for the duration of apprenticeships in the greater part of
      incorporated trades. All such incorporations were anciently called
      universities, which, indeed, is the proper Latin name for any
      incorporation whatever. The university of smiths, the university of
      tailors, etc. are expressions which we commonly meet with in the old
      charters of ancient towns. When those particular incorporations, which are
      now peculiarly called universities, were first established, the term of
      years which it was necessary to study, in order to obtain the degree of
      master of arts, appears evidently to have been copied from the term of
      apprenticeship in common trades, of which the incorporations were much
      more ancient. As to have wrought seven years under a master properly
      qualified, was necessary, in order to entitle any person to become a
      master, and to have himself apprentices in a common trade; so to have
      studied seven years under a master properly qualified, was necessary to
      entitle him to become a master, teacher, or doctor (words anciently
      synonymous), in the liberal arts, and to have scholars or apprentices
      (words likewise originally synonymous) to study under him.  By the 5th of Elizabeth, commonly called the Statute of Apprenticeship, it
      was enacted, that no person should, for the future, exercise any trade,
      craft, or mystery, at that time exercised in England, unless he had
      previously served to it an apprenticeship of seven years at least; and
      what before had been the bye-law of many particular corporations, became
      in England the general and public law of all trades carried on in market
      towns. For though the words of the statute are very general, and seem
      plainly to include the whole kingdom, by interpretation its operation has
      been limited to market towns; it having been held that, in country
      villages, a person may exercise several different trades, though he has
      not served a seven years apprenticeship to each, they being necessary for
      the conveniency of the inhabitants, and the number of people frequently
      not being sufficient to supply each with a particular set of hands. By a
      strict interpretation of the words, too, the operation of this statute has
      been limited to those trades which were established in England before the
      5th of Elizabeth, and has never been extended to such as have been
      introduced since that time. This limitation has given occasion to several
      distinctions, which, considered as rules of police, appear as foolish as
      can well be imagined. It has been adjudged, for example, that a
      coach-maker can neither himself make nor employ journeymen to make his
      coach-wheels, but must buy them of a master wheel-wright; this latter
      trade having been exercised in England before the 5th of Elizabeth. But a
      wheel-wright, though he has never served an apprenticeship to a
      coachmaker, may either himself make or employ journeymen to make coaches;
      the trade of a coachmaker not being within the statute, because not
      exercised in England at the time when it was made. The manufactures of
      Manchester, Birmingham, and Wolverhampton, are many of them, upon this
      account, not within the statute, not having been exercised in England
      before the 5th of Elizabeth.  In France, the duration of apprenticeships is different in different towns
      and in different trades. In Paris, five years is the term required in a
      great number; but, before any person can be qualified to exercise the
      trade as a master, he must, in many of them, serve five years more as a
      journeyman. During this latter term, he is called the companion of his
      master, and the term itself is called his companionship.  In Scotland, there is no general law which regulates universally the
      duration of apprenticeships. The term is different in different
      corporations. Where it is long, a part of it may generally be redeemed by
      paying a small fine. In most towns, too, a very small fine is sufficient
      to purchase the freedom of any corporation. The weavers of linen and
      hempen cloth, the principal manufactures of the country, as well as all
      other artificers subservient to them, wheel-makers, reel-makers, etc. may
      exercise their trades in any town-corporate without paying any fine. In
      all towns-corporate, all persons are free to sell butchers’ meat upon any
      lawful day of the week. Three years is, in Scotland, a common term of
      apprenticeship, even in some very nice trades; and, in general, I know of
      no country in Europe, in which corporation laws are so little oppressive.  The property which every man has in his own labour, as it is the original
      foundation of all other property, so it is the most sacred and inviolable.
      The patrimony of a poor man lies in the strength and dexterity of his
      hands; and to hinder him from employing this strength and dexterity in
      what manner he thinks proper, without injury to his neighbour, is a plain
      violation of this most sacred property. It is a manifest encroachment upon
      the just liberty, both of the workman, and of those who might be disposed
      to employ him. As it hinders the one from working at what he thinks
      proper, so it hinders the others from employing whom they think proper. To
      judge whether he is fit to be employed, may surely be trusted to the
      discretion of the employers, whose interest it so much concerns. The
      affected anxiety of the lawgiver, lest they should employ an improper
      person, is evidently as impertinent as it is oppressive.  The institution of long apprenticeships can give no security that
      insufficient workmanship shall not frequently be exposed to public sale.
      When this is done, it is generally the effect of fraud, and not of
      inability; and the longest apprenticeship can give no security against
      fraud. Quite different regulations are necessary to prevent this abuse.
      The sterling mark upon plate, and the stamps upon linen and woollen cloth,
      give the purchaser much greater security than any statute of
      apprenticeship. He generally looks at these, but never thinks it worth
      while to enquire whether the workman had served a seven years
      apprenticeship.  The institution of long apprenticeships has no tendency to form young
      people to industry. A journeyman who works by the piece is likely to be
      industrious, because he derives a benefit from every exertion of his
      industry. An apprentice is likely to be idle, and almost always is so,
      because he has no immediate interest to be otherwise. In the inferior
      employments, the sweets of labour consist altogether in the recompence of
      labour. They who are soonest in a condition to enjoy the sweets of it, are
      likely soonest to conceive a relish for it, and to acquire the early habit
      of industry. A young man naturally conceives an aversion to labour, when
      for a long time he receives no benefit from it. The boys who are put out
      apprentices from public charities are generally bound for more than the
      usual number of years, and they generally turn out very idle and
      worthless.  Apprenticeships were altogether unknown to the ancients. The reciprocal
      duties of master and apprentice make a considerable article in every
      modern code. The Roman law is perfectly silent with regard to them. I know
      no Greek or Latin word (I might venture, I believe, to assert that there
      is none) which expresses the idea we now annex to the word apprentice, a
      servant bound to work at a particular trade for the benefit of a master,
      during a term of years, upon condition that the master shall teach him
      that trade.  Long apprenticeships are altogether unnecessary. The arts, which are much
      superior to common trades, such as those of making clocks and watches,
      contain no such mystery as to require a long course of instruction. The
      first invention of such beautiful machines, indeed, and even that of some
      of the instruments employed in making them, must no doubt have been the
      work of deep thought and long time, and may justly be considered as among
      the happiest efforts of human ingenuity. But when both have been fairly
      invented, and are well understood, to explain to any young man, in the
      completest manner, how to apply the instruments, and how to construct the
      machines, cannot well require more than the lessons of a few weeks;
      perhaps those of a few days might be sufficient. In the common mechanic
      trades, those of a few days might certainly be sufficient. The dexterity
      of hand, indeed, even in common trades, cannot be acquired without much
      practice and experience. But a young man would practice with much more
      diligence and attention, if from the beginning he wrought as a journeyman,
      being paid in proportion to the little work which he could execute, and
      paying in his turn for the materials which he might sometimes spoil
      through awkwardness and inexperience. His education would generally in
      this way be more effectual, and always less tedious and expensive. The
      master, indeed, would be a loser. He would lose all the wages of the
      apprentice, which he now saves, for seven years together. In the end,
      perhaps, the apprentice himself would be a loser. In a trade so easily
      learnt he would have more competitors, and his wages, when he came to be a
      complete workman, would be much less than at present. The same increase of
      competition would reduce the profits of the masters, as well as the wages
      of workmen. The trades, the crafts, the mysteries, would all be losers.
      But the public would be a gainer, the work of all artificers coming in
      this way much cheaper to market.  It is to prevent his reduction of price, and consequently of wages and
      profit, by restraining that free competition which would most certainly
      occasion it, that all corporations, and the greater part of corporation
      laws have been established. In order to erect a corporation, no other
      authority in ancient times was requisite, in many parts of Europe, but
      that of the town-corporate in which it was established. In England,
      indeed, a charter from the king was likewise necessary. But this
      prerogative of the crown seems to have been reserved rather for extorting
      money from the subject, than for the defence of the common liberty against
      such oppressive monopolies. Upon paying a fine to the king, the charter
      seems generally to have been readily granted; and when any particular
      class of artificers or traders thought proper to act as a corporation,
      without a charter, such adulterine guilds, as they were called, were not
      always disfranchised upon that account, but obliged to fine annually to
      the king, for permission to exercise their usurped privileges {See Madox
      Firma Burgi p. 26 etc.}. The immediate inspection of all corporations, and
      of the bye-laws which they might think proper to enact for their own
      government, belonged to the town-corporate in which they were established;
      and whatever discipline was exercised over them, proceeded commonly, not
      from the king, but from that greater incorporation of which those
      subordinate ones were only parts or members.  The government of towns-corporate was altogether in the hands of traders
      and artificers, and it was the manifest interest of every particular class
      of them, to prevent the market from being overstocked, as they commonly
      express it, with their own particular species of industry; which is in
      reality to keep it always understocked. Each class was eager to establish
      regulations proper for this purpose, and, provided it was allowed to do
      so, was willing to consent that every other class should do the same. In
      consequence of such regulations, indeed, each class was obliged to buy the
      goods they had occasion for from every other within the town, somewhat
      dearer than they otherwise might have done. But, in recompence, they were
      enabled to sell their own just as much dearer; so that, so far it was as
      broad as long, as they say; and in the dealings of the different classes
      within the town with one another, none of them were losers by these
      regulations. But in their dealings with the country they were all great
      gainers; and in these latter dealings consist the whole trade which
      supports and enriches every town.  Every town draws its whole subsistence, and all the materials of its
      industry, from the: country. It pays for these chiefly in two ways. First,
      by sending back to the country a part of those materials wrought up and
      manufactured; in which case, their price is augmented by the wages of the
      workmen, and the profits of their masters or immediate employers;
      secondly, by sending to it a part both of the rude and manufactured
      produce, either of other countries, or of distant parts of the same
      country, imported into the town; in which case, too, the original price of
      those goods is augmented by the wages of the carriers or sailors, and by
      the profits of the merchants who employ them. In what is gained upon the
      first of those branches of commerce, consists the advantage which the town
      makes by its manufactures; in what is gained upon the second, the
      advantage of its inland and foreign trade. The wages of the workmen, and
      the profits of their different employers, make up the whole of what is
      gained upon both. Whatever regulations, therefore, tend to increase those
      wages and profits beyond what they otherwise: would be, tend to enable the
      town to purchase, with a smaller quantity of its labour, the produce of a
      greater quantity of the labour of the country. They give the traders and
      artificers in the town an advantage over the landlords, farmers, and
      labourers, in the country, and break down that natural equality which
      would otherwise take place in the commerce which is carried on between
      them. The whole annual produce of the labour of the society is annually
      divided between those two different sets of people. By means of those
      regulations, a greater share of it is given to the inhabitants of the town
      than would otherwise fall to them, and a less to those of the country.  The price which the town really pays for the provisions and materials
      annually imported into it, is the quantity of manufactures and other goods
      annually exported from it. The dearer the latter are sold, the cheaper the
      former are bought. The industry of the town becomes more, and that of the
      country less advantageous.  That the industry which is carried on in towns is, everywhere in Europe,
      more advantageous than that which is carried on in the country, without
      entering into any very nice computations, we may satisfy ourselves by one
      very simple and obvious observation. In every country of Europe, we find
      at least a hundred people who have acquired great fortunes, from small
      beginnings, by trade and manufactures, the industry which properly belongs
      to towns, for one who has done so by that which properly belongs to the
      country, the raising of rude produce by the improvement and cultivation of
      land. Industry, therefore, must be better rewarded, the wages of labour
      and the profits of stock must evidently be greater, in the one situation
      than in the other. But stock and labour naturally seek the most
      advantageous employment. They naturally, therefore, resort as much as they
      can to the town, and desert the country.  The inhabitants of a town being collected into one place, can easily
      combine together. The most insignificant trades carried on in towns have,
      accordingly, in some place or other, been incorporated; and even where
      they have never been incorporated, yet the corporation-spirit, the
      jealousy of strangers, the aversion to take apprentices, or to communicate
      the secret of their trade, generally prevail in them, and often teach
      them, by voluntary associations and agreements, to prevent that free
      competition which they cannot prohibit by bye-laws. The trades which
      employ but a small number of hands, run most easily into such
      combinations. Half-a-dozen wool-combers, perhaps, are necessary to keep a
      thousand spinners and weavers at work. By combining not to take
      apprentices, they can not only engross the employment, but reduce the
      whole manufacture into a sort of slavery to themselves, and raise the
      price of their labour much above what is due to the nature of their work.  The inhabitants of the country, dispersed in distant places, cannot easily
      combine together. They have not only never been incorporated, but the
      incorporation spirit never has prevailed among them. No apprenticeship has
      ever been thought necessary to qualify for husbandry, the great trade of
      the country. After what are called the fine arts, and the liberal
      professions, however, there is perhaps no trade which requires so great a
      variety of knowledge and experience. The innumerable volumes which have
      been written upon it in all languages, may satisfy us, that among the
      wisest and most learned nations, it has never been regarded as a matter
      very easily understood. And from all those volumes we shall in vain
      attempt to collect that knowledge of its various and complicated
      operations which is commonly possessed even by the common farmer; how
      contemptuously soever the very contemptible authors of some of them may
      sometimes affect to speak of him. There is scarce any common mechanic
      trade, on the contrary, of which all the operations may not be as
      completely and distinctly explained in a pamphlet of a very few pages, as
      it is possible for words illustrated by figures to explain them. In the
      history of the arts, now publishing by the French Academy of Sciences,
      several of them are actually explained in this manner. The direction of
      operations, besides, which must be varied with every change of the
      weather, as well as with many other accidents, requires much more judgment
      and discretion, than that of those which are always the same, or very
      nearly the same.  Not only the art of the farmer, the general direction of the operations of
      husbandry, but many inferior branches of country labour require much more
      skill and experience than the greater part of mechanic trades. The man who
      works upon brass and iron, works with instruments, and upon materials of
      which the temper is always the same, or very nearly the same. But the man
      who ploughs the ground with a team of horses or oxen, works with
      instruments of which the health, strength, and temper, are very different
      upon different occasions. The condition of the materials which he works
      upon, too, is as variable as that of the instruments which he works with,
      and both require to be managed with much judgment and discretion. The
      common ploughman, though generally regarded as the pattern of stupidity
      and ignorance, is seldom defective in this judgment and discretion. He is
      less accustomed, indeed, to social intercourse, than the mechanic who
      lives in a town. His voice and language are more uncouth, and more
      difficult to be understood by those who are not used to them. His
      understanding, however, being accustomed to consider a greater variety of
      objects, is generally much superior to that of the other, whose whole
      attention, from morning till night, is commonly occupied in performing one
      or two very simple operations. How much the lower ranks of people in the
      country are really superior to those of the town, is well known to every
      man whom either business or curiosity has led to converse much with both.
      In China and Indostan, accordingly, both the rank and the wages of country
      labourers are said to be superior to those of the greater part of
      artificers and manufacturers. They would probably be so everywhere, if
      corporation laws and the corporation spirit did not prevent it.  The superiority which the industry of the towns has everywhere in Europe
      over that of the country, is not altogether owing to corporations and
      corporation laws. It is supported by many other regulations. The high
      duties upon foreign manufactures, and upon all goods imported by alien
      merchants, all tend to the same purpose. Corporation laws enable the
      inhabitants of towns to raise their prices, without fearing to be
      undersold by the free competition of their own countrymen. Those other
      regulations secure them equally against that of foreigners. The
      enhancement of price occasioned by both is everywhere finally paid by the
      landlords, farmers, and labourers, of the country, who have seldom opposed
      the establishment of such monopolies. They have commonly neither
      inclination nor fitness to enter into combinations; and the clamour and
      sophistry of merchants and manufacturers easily persuade them, that the
      private interest of a part, and of a subordinate part, of the society, is
      the general interest of the whole.  In Great Britain, the superiority of the industry of the towns over that
      of the country seems to have been greater formerly than in the present
      times. The wages of country labour approach nearer to those of
      manufacturing labour, and the profits of stock employed in agriculture to
      those of trading and manufacturing stock, than they are said to have done
      in the last century, or in the beginning of the present. This change may
      be regarded as the necessary, though very late consequence of the
      extraordinary encouragement given to the industry of the towns. The stocks
      accumulated in them come in time to be so great, that it can no longer be
      employed with the ancient profit in that species of industry which is
      peculiar to them. That industry has its limits like every other; and the
      increase of stock, by increasing the competition, necessarily reduces the
      profit. The lowering of profit in the town forces out stock to the
      country, where, by creating a new demand for country labour, it
      necessarily raises its wages. It then spreads itself, if I my say so, over
      the face of the land, and, by being employed in agriculture, is in part
      restored to the country, at the expense of which, in a great measure, it
      had originally been accumulated in the town. That everywhere in Europe the
      greatest improvements of the country have been owing to such over flowings
      of the stock originally accumulated in the towns, I shall endeavour to
      shew hereafter, and at the same time to demonstrate, that though some
      countries have, by this course, attained to a considerable degree of
      opulence, it is in itself necessarily slow, uncertain, liable to be
      disturbed and interrupted by innumerable accidents, and, in every respect,
      contrary to the order of nature and of reason. The interests, prejudices,
      laws, and customs, which have given occasion to it, I shall endeavour to
      explain as fully and distinctly as I can in the third and fourth books of
      this Inquiry.  People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and
      diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public,
      or in some contrivance to raise prices. It is impossible, indeed, to
      prevent such meetings, by any law which either could be executed, or would
      be consistent with liberty and justice. But though the law cannot hinder
      people of the same trade from sometimes assembling together, it ought to
      do nothing to facilitate such assemblies, much less to render them
      necessary.  A regulation which obliges all those of the same trade in a particular
      town to enter their names and places of abode in a public register,
      facilitates such assemblies. It connects individuals who might never
      otherwise be known to one another, and gives every man of the trade a
      direction where to find every other man of it.  A regulation which enables those of the same trade to tax themselves, in
      order to provide for their poor, their sick, their widows and orphans, by
      giving them a common interest to manage, renders such assemblies
      necessary.  An incorporation not only renders them necessary, but makes the act of the
      majority binding upon the whole. In a free trade, an effectual combination
      cannot be established but by the unanimous consent of every single trader,
      and it cannot last longer than every single trader continues of the same
      mind. The majority of a corporation can enact a bye-law, with proper
      penalties, which will limit the competition more effectually and more
      durably than any voluntary combination whatever.  The pretence that corporations are necessary for the better government of
      the trade, is without any foundation. The real and effectual discipline
      which is exercised over a workman, is not that of his corporation, but
      that of his customers. It is the fear of losing their employment which
      restrains his frauds and corrects his negligence. An exclusive corporation
      necessarily weakens the force of this discipline. A particular set of
      workmen must then be employed, let them behave well or ill. It is upon
      this account that, in many large incorporated towns, no tolerable workmen
      are to be found, even in some of the most necessary trades. If you would
      have your work tolerably executed, it must be done in the suburbs, where
      the workmen, having no exclusive privilege, have nothing but their
      character to depend upon, and you must then smuggle it into the town as
      well as you can.  It is in this manner that the policy of Europe, by restraining the
      competition in some employments to a smaller number than would otherwise
      be disposed to enter into them, occasions a very important inequality in
      the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the different employments
      of labour and stock.  Secondly, the policy of Europe, by increasing the competition in some
      employments beyond what it naturally would be, occasions another
      inequality, of an opposite kind, in the whole of the advantages and
      disadvantages of the different employments of labour and stock.  It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper number of
      young people should be educated for certain professions, that sometimes
      the public, and sometimes the piety of private founders, have established
      many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, etc. for this
      purpose, which draw many more people into those trades than could
      otherwise pretend to follow them. In all Christian countries, I believe,
      the education of the greater part of churchmen is paid for in this
      manner. Very few of them are educated altogether at their own expense.
      The long, tedious, and expensive education, therefore, of those who are,
      will not always procure them a suitable reward, the church being crowded
      with people, who, in order to get employment, are willing to accept of a
      much smaller recompence than what such an education would otherwise have
      entitled them to; and in this manner the competition of the poor takes
      away the reward of the rich. It would be indecent, no doubt, to compare
      either a curate or a chaplain with a journeyman in any common trade. The
      pay of a curate or chaplain, however, may very properly be considered as
      of the same nature with the wages of a journeyman. They are all three
      paid for their work according to the contract which they may happen to
      make with their respective superiors. Till after the middle of the
      fourteenth century, five merks, containing about as much silver as ten
      pounds of our present money, was in England the usual pay of a curate or
      a stipendiary parish priest, as we find it regulated by the decrees of
      several different national councils. At the same period, fourpence a-day,
      containing the same quantity of silver as a shilling of our present
      money, was declared to be the pay of a master mason; and threepence
      a-day, equal to ninepence of our present money, that of a journeyman
      mason. {See the Statute of Labourers, 25, Ed. III.} The wages of both
      these labourers, therefore, supposing them to have been constantly
      employed, were much superior to those of the curate. The wages of the
      master mason, supposing him to have been without employment one-third of
      the year, would have fully equalled them. By the 12th of Queen Anne, c.
      12. it is declared, “That whereas, for want of sufficient
      maintenance and encouragement to curates, the cures have, in several
      places, been meanly supplied, the bishop is, therefore, empowered to
      appoint, by writing under his hand and seal, a sufficient certain stipend
      or allowance, not exceeding fifty, and not less than twenty pounds
      a-year”. Forty pounds a-year is reckoned at present very good pay
      for a curate; and, notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are many
      curacies under twenty pounds a-year. There are journeymen shoemakers in
      London who earn forty pounds a-year, and there is scarce an industrious
      workman of any kind in that metropolis who does not earn more than
      twenty. This last sum, indeed, does not exceed what is frequently earned
      by common labourers in many country parishes. Whenever the law has
      attempted to regulate the wages of workmen, it has always been rather to
      lower them than to raise them. But the law has, upon many occasions,
      attempted to raise the wages of curates, and, for the dignity of the
      church, to oblige the rectors of parishes to give them more than the
      wretched maintenance which they themselves might be willing to accept of.
      And, in both cases, the law seems to have been equally ineffectual, and
      has never either been able to raise the wages of curates, or to sink
      those of labourers to the degree that was intended; because it has never
      been able to hinder either the one from being willing to accept of less
      than the legal allowance, on account of the indigence of their situation
      and the multitude of their competitors, or the other from receiving more,
      on account of the contrary competition of those who expected to derive
      either profit or pleasure from employing them.  The great benefices and other ecclesiastical dignities support the honour
      of the church, notwithstanding the mean circumstances of some of its
      inferior members. The respect paid to the profession, too, makes some
      compensation even to them for the meanness of their pecuniary recompence.
      In England, and in all Roman catholic countries, the lottery of the church
      is in reality much more advantageous than is necessary. The example of the
      churches of Scotland, of Geneva, and of several other protestant churches,
      may satisfy us, that in so creditable a profession, in which education is
      so easily procured, the hopes of much more moderate benefices will draw a
      sufficient number of learned, decent, and respectable men into holy
      orders.  In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law and physic, if
      an equal proportion of people were educated at the public expense, the
      competition would soon be so great as to sink very much their pecuniary
      reward. It might then not be worth any man’s while to educate his son to
      either of those professions at his own expense. They would be entirely
      abandoned to such as had been educated by those public charities, whose
      numbers and necessities would oblige them in general to content themselves
      with a very miserable recompence, to the entire degradation of the now
      respectable professions of law and physic.  That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men of letters, are pretty
      much in the situation which lawyers and physicians probably would be in,
      upon the foregoing supposition. In every part of Europe, the greater part
      of them have been educated for the church, but have been hindered by
      different reasons from entering into holy orders. They have generally,
      therefore, been educated at the public expense; and their numbers are
      everywhere so great, as commonly to reduce the price of their labour to a
      very paltry recompence.  Before the invention of the art of printing, the only employment by which
      a man of letters could make any thing by his talents, was that of a public
      or private teacher, or by communicating to other people the curious and
      useful knowledge which he had acquired himself; and this is still surely a
      more honourable, a more useful, and, in general, even a more profitable
      employment than that other of writing for a bookseller, to which the art
      of printing has given occasion. The time and study, the genius, knowledge,
      and application requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences,
      are at least equal to what is necessary for the greatest practitioners in
      law and physic. But the usual reward of the eminent teacher bears no
      proportion to that of the lawyer or physician, because the trade of the
      one is crowded with indigent people, who have been brought up to it at the
      public expense; whereas those of the other two are encumbered with very
      few who have not been educated at their own. The usual recompence,
      however, of public and private teachers, small as it may appear, would
      undoubtedly be less than it is, if the competition of those yet more
      indigent men of letters, who write for bread, was not taken out of the
      market. Before the invention of the art of printing, a scholar and a
      beggar seem to have been terms very nearly synonymous. The different
      governors of the universities, before that time, appear to have often
      granted licences to their scholars to beg.  In ancient times, before any charities of this kind had been established
      for the education of indigent people to the learned professions, the
      rewards of eminent teachers appear to have been much more considerable.
      Isocrates, in what is called his discourse against the sophists,
      reproaches the teachers of his own times with inconsistency. “They make
      the most magnificent promises to their scholars,” says he, “and undertake
      to teach them to be wise, to be happy, and to be just; and, in return for
      so important a service, they stipulate the paltry reward of four or five
      minae.” “They who teach wisdom,” continues he, “ought certainly to be wise
      themselves; but if any man were to sell such a bargain for such a price,
      he would be convicted of the most evident folly.” He certainly does not
      mean here to exaggerate the reward, and we may be assured that it was not
      less than he represents it. Four minae were equal to thirteen pounds six
      shillings and eightpence; five minae to sixteen pounds thirteen shillings
      and fourpence. Something not less than the largest of those two sums,
      therefore, must at that time have been usually paid to the most eminent
      teachers at Athens. Isocrates himself demanded ten minae, or £ 33:6:8 from
      each scholar. When he taught at Athens, he is said to have had a hundred
      scholars. I understand this to be the number whom he taught at one time,
      or who attended what we would call one course of lectures; a number which
      will not appear extraordinary from so great a city to so famous a teacher,
      who taught, too, what was at that time the most fashionable of all
      sciences, rhetoric. He must have made, therefore, by each course of
      lectures, a thousand minae, or £ 3335:6:8. A thousand minae, accordingly,
      is said by Plutarch, in another place, to have been his didactron, or
      usual price of teaching. Many other eminent teachers in those times appear
      to have acquired great fortunes. Georgias made a present to the temple of
      Delphi of his own statue in solid gold. We must not, I presume, suppose
      that it was as large as the life. His way of living, as well as that of
      Hippias and Protagoras, two other eminent teachers of those times, is
      represented by Plato as splendid, even to ostentation. Plato himself is
      said to have lived with a good deal of magnificence. Aristotle, after
      having been tutor to Alexander, and most munificently rewarded, as it is
      universally agreed, both by him and his father, Philip, thought it worth
      while, notwithstanding, to return to Athens, in order to resume the
      teaching of his school. Teachers of the sciences were probably in those
      times less common than they came to be in an age or two afterwards, when
      the competition had probably somewhat reduced both the price of their
      labour and the admiration for their persons. The most eminent of them,
      however, appear always to have enjoyed a degree of consideration much
      superior to any of the like profession in the present times. The Athenians
      sent Carneades the academic, and Diogenes the stoic, upon a solemn embassy
      to Rome; and though their city had then declined from its former grandeur,
      it was still an independent and considerable republic.  Carneades, too, was a Babylonian by birth; and as there never was a people
      more jealous of admitting foreigners to public offices than the Athenians,
      their consideration for him must have been very great.  This inequality is, upon the whole, perhaps rather advantageous than
      hurtful to the public. It may somewhat degrade the profession of a public
      teacher; but the cheapness of literary education is surely an advantage
      which greatly overbalances this trifling inconveniency. The public, too,
      might derive still greater benefit from it, if the constitution of those
      schools and colleges, in which education is carried on, was more
      reasonable than it is at present through the greater part of Europe.  Thirdly, the policy of Europe, by obstructing the free circulation of
      labour and stock, both from employment to employment, and from place to
      place, occasions, in some cases, a very inconvenient inequality in the
      whole of the advantages and disadvantages of their different employments.  The statute of apprenticeship obstructs the free circulation of labour
      from one employment to another, even in the same place. The exclusive
      privileges of corporations obstruct it from one place to another, even in
      the same employment.  It frequently happens, that while high wages are given to the workmen in
      one manufacture, those in another are obliged to content themselves with
      bare subsistence. The one is in an advancing state, and has therefore a
      continual demand for new hands; the other is in a declining state, and the
      superabundance of hands is continually increasing. Those two manufactures
      may sometimes be in the same town, and sometimes in the same
      neighbourhood, without being able to lend the least assistance to one
      another. The statute of apprenticeship may oppose it in the one case, and
      both that and an exclusive corporation in the other. In many different
      manufactures, however, the operations are so much alike, that the workmen
      could easily change trades with one another, if those absurd laws did not
      hinder them. The arts of weaving plain linen and plain silk, for example,
      are almost entirely the same. That of weaving plain woollen is somewhat
      different; but the difference is so insignificant, that either a linen or
      a silk weaver might become a tolerable workman in a very few days. If any
      of those three capital manufactures, therefore, were decaying, the workmen
      might find a resource in one of the other two which was in a more
      prosperous condition; and their wages would neither rise too high in the
      thriving, nor sink too low in the decaying manufacture. The linen
      manufacture, indeed, is in England, by a particular statute, open to every
      body; but as it is not much cultivated through the greater part of the
      country, it can afford no general resource to the work men of other
      decaying manufactures, who, wherever the statute of apprenticeship takes
      place, have no other choice, but either to come upon the parish, or to
      work as common labourers; for which, by their habits, they are much worse
      qualified than for any sort of manufacture that bears any resemblance to
      their own. They generally, therefore, chuse to come upon the parish.  Whatever obstructs the free circulation of labour from one employment to
      another, obstructs that of stock likewise; the quantity of stock which can
      be employed in any branch of business depending very much upon that of the
      labour which can be employed in it. Corporation laws, however, give less
      obstruction to the free circulation of stock from one place to another,
      than to that of labour. It is everywhere much easier for a wealthy
      merchant to obtain the privilege of trading in a town-corporate, than for
      a poor artificer to obtain that of working in it.  The obstruction which corporation laws give to the free circulation of
      labour is common, I believe, to every part of Europe. That which is given
      to it by the poor laws is, so far as I know, peculiar to England. It
      consists in the difficulty which a poor man finds in obtaining a
      settlement, or even in being allowed to exercise his industry in any
      parish but that to which he belongs. It is the labour of artificers and
      manufacturers only of which the free circulation is obstructed by
      corporation laws. The difficulty of obtaining settlements obstructs even
      that of common labour. It may be worth while to give some account of the
      rise, progress, and present state of this disorder, the greatest, perhaps,
      of any in the police of England.  When, by the destruction of monasteries, the poor had been deprived of the
      charity of those religious houses, after some other ineffectual attempts
      for their relief, it was enacted, by the 43d of Elizabeth, c. 2. that
      every parish should be bound to provide for its own poor, and that
      overseers of the poor should be annually appointed, who, with the
      church-wardens, should raise, by a parish rate, competent sums for this
      purpose.  By this statute, the necessity of providing for their own poor was
      indispensably imposed upon every parish. Who were to be considered as the
      poor of each parish became, therefore, a question of some importance. This
      question, after some variation, was at last determined by the 13th and
      14th of Charles II. when it was enacted, that forty days undisturbed
      residence should gain any person a settlement in any parish; but that
      within that time it should be lawful for two justices of the peace, upon
      complaint made by the church-wardens or overseers of the poor, to remove
      any new inhabitant to the parish where he was last legally settled; unless
      he either rented a tenement of ten pounds a-year, or could give such
      security for the discharge of the parish where he was then living, as
      those justices should judge sufficient.  Some frauds, it is said, were committed in consequence of this statute;
      parish officers sometimes bribing their own poor to go clandestinely to
      another parish, and, by keeping themselves concealed for forty days, to
      gain a settlement there, to the discharge of that to which they properly
      belonged. It was enacted, therefore, by the 1st of James II. that the
      forty days undisturbed residence of any person necessary to gain a
      settlement, should be accounted only from the time of his delivering
      notice, in writing, of the place of his abode and the number of his
      family, to one of the church-wardens or overseers of the parish where he
      came to dwell.  But parish officers, it seems, were not always more honest with regard to
      their own than they had been with regard to other parishes, and sometimes
      connived at such intrusions, receiving the notice, and taking no proper
      steps in consequence of it. As every person in a parish, therefore, was
      supposed to have an interest to prevent as much as possible their being
      burdened by such intruders, it was further enacted by the 3rd of William
      III. that the forty days residence should be accounted only from the
      publication of such notice in writing on Sunday in the church, immediately
      after divine service.  “After all,” says Doctor Burn, “this kind of settlement, by continuing
      forty days after publication of notice in writing, is very seldom
      obtained; and the design of the acts is not so much for gaining of
      settlements, as for the avoiding of them by persons coming into a parish
      clandestinely, for the giving of notice is only putting a force upon the
      parish to remove. But if a person’s situation is such, that it is doubtful
      whether he is actually removable or not, he shall, by giving of notice,
      compel the parish either to allow him a settlement uncontested, by
      suffering him to continue forty days, or by removing him to try the
      right.”  This statute, therefore, rendered it almost impracticable for a poor man
      to gain a new settlement in the old way, by forty days inhabitancy. But
      that it might not appear to preclude altogether the common people of one
      parish from ever establishing themselves with security in another, it
      appointed four other ways by which a settlement might be gained without
      any notice delivered or published. The first was, by being taxed to parish
      rates and paying them; the second, by being elected into an annual parish
      office, and serving in it a year; the third, by serving an apprenticeship
      in the parish; the fourth, by being hired into service there for a year,
      and continuing in the same service during the whole of it. Nobody can gain
      a settlement by either of the two first ways, but by the public deed of
      the whole parish, who are too well aware of the consequences to adopt any
      new-comer, who has nothing but his labour to support him, either by taxing
      him to parish rates, or by electing him into a parish office.  No married man can well gain any settlement in either of the two last
      ways. An apprentice is scarce ever married; and it is expressly enacted,
      that no married servant shall gain any settlement by being hired for a
      year. The principal effect of introducing settlement by service, has been
      to put out in a great measure the old fashion of hiring for a year; which
      before had been so customary in England, that even at this day, if no
      particular term is agreed upon, the law intends that every servant is
      hired for a year. But masters are not always willing to give their
      servants a settlement by hiring them in this manner; and servants are not
      always willing to be so hired, because, as every last settlement
      discharges all the foregoing, they might thereby lose their original
      settlement in the places of their nativity, the habitation of their
      parents and relations.  No independent workman, it is evident, whether labourer or artificer, is
      likely to gain any new settlement, either by apprenticeship or by service.
      When such a person, therefore, carried his industry to a new parish, he
      was liable to be removed, how healthy and industrious soever, at the
      caprice of any churchwarden or overseer, unless he either rented a
      tenement of ten pounds a-year, a thing impossible for one who has nothing
      but his labour to live by, or could give such security for the discharge
      of the parish as two justices of the peace should judge sufficient.  What security they shall require, indeed, is left altogether to their
      discretion; but they cannot well require less than thirty pounds, it
      having been enacted, that the purchase even of a freehold estate of less
      than thirty pounds value, shall not gain any person a settlement, as not
      being sufficient for the discharge of the parish. But this is a security
      which scarce any man who lives by labour can give; and much greater
      security is frequently demanded.  In order to restore, in some measure, that free circulation of labour
      which those different statutes had almost entirely taken away, the
      invention of certificates was fallen upon. By the 8th and 9th of William
      III. it was enacted that if any person should bring a certificate from the
      parish where he was last legally settled, subscribed by the church-wardens
      and overseers of the poor, and allowed by two justices of the peace, that
      every other parish should be obliged to receive him; that he should not be
      removable merely upon account of his being likely to become chargeable,
      but only upon his becoming actually chargeable; and that then the parish
      which granted the certificate should be obliged to pay the expense both of
      his maintenance and of his removal. And in order to give the most perfect
      security to the parish where such certificated man should come to reside,
      it was further enacted by the same statute, that he should gain no
      settlement there by any means whatever, except either by renting a
      tenement of ten pounds a-year, or by serving upon his own account in an
      annual parish office for one whole year; and consequently neither by
      notice nor by service, nor by apprenticeship, nor by paying parish rates.
      By the 12th of Queen Anne, too, stat. 1, c.18, it was further enacted,
      that neither the servants nor apprentices of such certificated man should
      gain any settlement in the parish where he resided under such certificate.  How far this invention has restored that free circulation of labour, which
      the preceding statutes had almost entirely taken away, we may learn from
      the following very judicious observation of Doctor Burn. “It is obvious,”
      says he, “that there are divers good reasons for requiring certificates
      with persons coming to settle in any place; namely, that persons residing
      under them can gain no settlement, neither by apprenticeship, nor by
      service, nor by giving notice, nor by paying parish rates; that they can
      settle neither apprentices nor servants; that if they become chargeable,
      it is certainly known whither to remove them, and the parish shall be paid
      for the removal, and for their maintenance in the mean time; and that, if
      they fall sick, and cannot be removed, the parish which gave the
      certificate must maintain them; none of all which can be without a
      certificate. Which reasons will hold proportionably for parishes not
      granting certificates in ordinary cases; for it is far more than an equal
      chance, but that they will have the certificated persons again, and in a
      worse condition.” The moral of this observation seems to be, that
      certificates ought always to be required by the parish where any poor man
      comes to reside, and that they ought very seldom to be granted by that
      which he purposes to leave. “There is somewhat of hardship in this matter
      of certificates,” says the same very intelligent author, in his History of
      the Poor Laws, “by putting it in the power of a parish officer to imprison
      a man as it were for life, however inconvenient it may be for him to
      continue at that place where he has had the misfortune to acquire what is
      called a settlement, or whatever advantage he may propose himself by
      living elsewhere.”  Though a certificate carries along with it no testimonial of good
      behaviour, and certifies nothing but that the person belongs to the parish
      to which he really does belong, it is altogether discretionary in the
      parish officers either to grant or to refuse it. A mandamus was once moved
      for, says Doctor Burn, to compel the church-wardens and overseers to sign
      a certificate; but the Court of King’s Bench rejected the motion as a very
      strange attempt.  The very unequal price of labour which we frequently find in England, in
      places at no great distance from one another, is probably owing to the
      obstruction which the law of settlements gives to a poor man who would
      carry his industry from one parish to another without a certificate. A
      single man, indeed who is healthy and industrious, may sometimes reside by
      sufferance without one; but a man with a wife and family who should
      attempt to do so, would, in most parishes, be sure of being removed; and,
      if the single man should afterwards marry, he would generally be removed
      likewise. The scarcity of hands in one parish, therefore, cannot always be
      relieved by their superabundance in another, as it is constantly in
      Scotland, and I believe, in all other countries where there is no
      difficulty of settlement. In such countries, though wages may sometimes
      rise a little in the neighbourhood of a great town, or wherever else there
      is an extraordinary demand for labour, and sink gradually as the distance
      from such places increases, till they fall back to the common rate of the
      country; yet we never meet with those sudden and unaccountable differences
      in the wages of neighbouring places which we sometimes find in England,
      where it is often more difficult for a poor man to pass the artificial
      boundary of a parish, than an arm of the sea, or a ridge of high
      mountains, natural boundaries which sometimes separate very distinctly
      different rates of wages in other countries.  To remove a man who has committed no misdemeanour, from the parish where
      he chooses to reside, is an evident violation of natural liberty and
      justice. The common people of England, however, so jealous of their
      liberty, but like the common people of most other countries, never rightly
      understanding wherein it consists, have now, for more than a century
      together, suffered themselves to be exposed to this oppression without a
      remedy. Though men of reflection, too, have sometimes complained of the
      law of settlements as a public grievance; yet it has never been the object
      of any general popular clamour, such as that against general warrants, an
      abusive practice undoubtedly, but such a one as was not likely to occasion
      any general oppression. There is scarce a poor man in England, of forty
      years of age, I will venture to say, who has not, in some part of his
      life, felt himself most cruelly oppressed by this ill-contrived law of
      settlements.  I shall conclude this long chapter with observing, that though anciently
      it was usual to rate wages, first by general laws extending over the whole
      kingdom, and afterwards by particular orders of the justices of peace in
      every particular county, both these practices have now gone entirely into
      disuse. “By the experience of above four hundred years,” says Doctor Burn,
      “it seems time to lay aside all endeavours to bring under strict
      regulations, what in its own nature seems incapable of minute limitation;
      for if all persons in the same kind of work were to receive equal wages,
      there would be no emulation, and no room left for industry or ingenuity.”  Particular acts of parliament, however, still attempt sometimes to
      regulate wages in particular trades, and in particular places. Thus the
      8th of George III. prohibits, under heavy penalties, all master tailors in
      London, and five miles round it, from giving, and their workmen from
      accepting, more than two shillings and sevenpence halfpenny a-day, except
      in the case of a general mourning. Whenever the legislature attempts to
      regulate the differences between masters and their workmen, its
      counsellors are always the masters. When the regulation, therefore, is in
      favour of the workmen, it is always just and equitable; but it is
      sometimes otherwise when in favour of the masters. Thus the law which
      obliges the masters in several different trades to pay their workmen in
      money, and not in goods, is quite just and equitable. It imposes no real
      hardship upon the masters. It only obliges them to pay that value in
      money, which they pretended to pay, but did not always really pay, in
      goods. This law is in favour of the workmen; but the 8th of George III. is
      in favour of the masters. When masters combine together, in order to
      reduce the wages of their workmen, they commonly enter into a private bond
      or agreement, not to give more than a certain wage, under a certain
      penalty. Were the workmen to enter into a contrary combination of the same
      kind, not to accept of a certain wage, under a certain penalty, the law
      would punish them very severely; and, if it dealt impartially, it would
      treat the masters in the same manner. But the 8th of George III. enforces
      by law that very regulation which masters sometimes attempt to establish
      by such combinations. The complaint of the workmen, that it puts the
      ablest and most industrious upon the same footing with an ordinary
      workman, seems perfectly well founded.  In ancient times, too, it was usual to attempt to regulate the profits of
      merchants and other dealers, by regulating the price of provisions and
      ether goods. The assize of bread is, so far as I know, the only remnant of
      this ancient usage. Where there is an exclusive corporation, it may,
      perhaps, be proper to regulate the price of the first necessary of life;
      but, where there is none, the competition will regulate it much better
      than any assize. The method of fixing the assize of bread, established by
      the 31st of George II. could not be put in practice in Scotland, on
      account of a defect in the law, its execution depending upon the office of
      clerk of the market, which does not exist there. This defect was not
      remedied till the third of George III. The want of an assize occasioned no
      sensible inconveniency; and the establishment of one in the few places
      where it has yet taken place has produced no sensible advantage. In the
      greater part of the towns in Scotland, however, there is an incorporation
      of bakers, who claim exclusive privileges, though they are not very
      strictly guarded. The proportion between the different rates, both of
      wages and profit, in the different employments of labour and stock, seems
      not to be much affected, as has already been observed, by the riches or
      poverty, the advancing, stationary, or declining state of the society.
      Such revolutions in the public welfare, though they affect the general
      rates both of wages and profit, must, in the end, affect them equally in
      all different employments. The proportion between them, therefore, must
      remain the same, and cannot well be altered, at least for any considerable
      time, by any such revolutions.    CHAPTER XI. OF THE RENT OF LAND.  Rent, considered as the price paid for the use of land, is naturally the
      highest which the tenant can afford to pay in the actual circumstances of
      the land. In adjusting the terms of the lease, the landlord endeavours to
      leave him no greater share of the produce than what is sufficient to keep
      up the stock from which he furnishes the seed, pays the labour, and
      purchases and maintains the cattle and other instruments of husbandry,
      together with the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood.
      This is evidently the smallest share with which the tenant can content
      himself, without being a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave him
      any more. Whatever part of the produce, or, what is the same thing,
      whatever part of its price, is over and above this share, he naturally
      endeavours to reserve to himself as the rent of his land, which is
      evidently the highest the tenant can afford to pay in the actual
      circumstances of the land. Sometimes, indeed, the liberality, more
      frequently the ignorance, of the landlord, makes him accept of somewhat
      less than this portion; and sometimes, too, though more rarely, the
      ignorance of the tenant makes him undertake to pay somewhat more, or to
      content himself with somewhat less, than the ordinary profits of farming
      stock in the neighbourhood. This portion, however, may still be considered
      as the natural rent of land, or the rent at which it is naturally meant
      that land should, for the most part, be let.  The rent of land, it may be thought, is frequently no more than a
      reasonable profit or interest for the stock laid out by the landlord upon
      its improvement. This, no doubt, may be partly the case upon some
      occasions; for it can scarce ever be more than partly the case. The
      landlord demands a rent even for unimproved land, and the supposed
      interest or profit upon the expense of improvement is generally an
      addition to this original rent. Those improvements, besides, are not
      always made by the stock of the landlord, but sometimes by that of the
      tenant. When the lease comes to be renewed, however, the landlord commonly
      demands the same augmentation of rent as if they had been all made by his
      own.  He sometimes demands rent for what is altogether incapable of human
      improvements. Kelp is a species of sea-weed, which, when burnt, yields an
      alkaline salt, useful for making glass, soap, and for several other
      purposes. It grows in several parts of Great Britain, particularly in
      Scotland, upon such rocks only as lie within the high-water mark, which
      are twice every day covered with the sea, and of which the produce,
      therefore, was never augmented by human industry. The landlord, however,
      whose estate is bounded by a kelp shore of this kind, demands a rent for
      it as much as for his corn-fields.  The sea in the neighbourhood of the islands of Shetland is more than
      commonly abundant in fish, which makes a great part of the subsistence of
      their inhabitants. But, in order to profit by the produce of the water,
      they must have a habitation upon the neighbouring land. The rent of the
      landlord is in proportion, not to what the farmer can make by the land,
      but to what he can make both by the land and the water. It is partly paid
      in sea-fish; and one of the very few instances in which rent makes a part
      of the price of that commodity, is to be found in that country.  The rent of land, therefore, considered as the price paid for the use of
      the land, is naturally a monopoly price. It is not at all proportioned to
      what the landlord may have laid out upon the improvement of the land, or
      to what he can afford to take, but to what the farmer can afford to give.  Such parts only of the produce of land can commonly be brought to market,
      of which the ordinary price is sufficient to replace the stock which must
      be employed in bringing them thither, together with its ordinary profits.
      If the ordinary price is more than this, the surplus part of it will
      naturally go to the rent of the land. If it is not more, though the
      commodity may be brought to market, it can afford no rent to the landlord.
      Whether the price is, or is not more, depends upon the demand.  There are some parts of the produce of land, for which the demand must
      always be such as to afford a greater price than what is sufficient to
      bring them to market; and there are others for which it either may or may
      not be such as to afford this greater price. The former must always afford
      a rent to the landlord. The latter sometimes may and sometimes may not,
      according to different circumstances.  Rent, it is to be observed, therefore, enters into the composition of the
      price of commodities in a different way from wages and profit. High or low
      wages and profit are the causes of high or low price; high or low rent is
      the effect of it. It is because high or low wages and profit must be paid,
      in order to bring a particular commodity to market, that its price is high
      or low. But it is because its price is high or low, a great deal more, or
      very little more, or no more, than what is sufficient to pay those wages
      and profit, that it affords a high rent, or a low rent, or no rent at all.  The particular consideration, first, of those parts of the produce of land
      which always afford some rent; secondly, of those which sometimes may and
      sometimes may not afford rent; and, thirdly, of the variations which, in
      the different periods of improvement, naturally take place in the relative
      value of those two different sorts of rude produce, when compared both
      with one another and with manufactured commodities, will divide this
      chapter into three parts.  PART I.—Of the Produce of Land which always affords Rent.  As men, like all other animals, naturally multiply in proportion to the
      means of their subsistence, food is always more or less in demand. It can
      always purchase or command a greater or smaller quantity of labour, and
      somebody can always be found who is willing to do something in order to
      obtain it. The quantity of labour, indeed, which it can purchase, is not
      always equal to what it could maintain, if managed in the most economical
      manner, on account of the high wages which are sometimes given to labour;
      but it can always purchase such a quantity of labour as it can maintain,
      according to the rate at which that sort of labour is commonly maintained
      in the neighbourhood.  But land, in almost any situation, produces a greater quantity of food
      than what is sufficient to maintain all the labour necessary for bringing
      it to market, in the most liberal way in which that labour is ever
      maintained. The surplus, too, is always more than sufficient to replace
      the stock which employed that labour, together with its profits.
      Something, therefore, always remains for a rent to the landlord.  The most desert moors in Norway and Scotland produce some sort of pasture
      for cattle, of which the milk and the increase are always more than
      sufficient, not only to maintain all the labour necessary for tending
      them, and to pay the ordinary profit to the farmer or the owner of the
      herd or flock, but to afford some small rent to the landlord. The rent
      increases in proportion to the goodness of the pasture. The same extent of
      ground not only maintains a greater number of cattle, but as they are
      brought within a smaller compass, less labour becomes requisite to tend
      them, and to collect their produce. The landlord gains both ways; by the
      increase of the produce, and by the diminution of the labour which must be
      maintained out of it.  The rent of land not only varies with its fertility, whatever be its
      produce, but with its situation, whatever be its fertility. Land in the
      neighbourhood of a town gives a greater rent than land equally fertile in
      a distant part of the country. Though it may cost no more labour to
      cultivate the one than the other, it must always cost more to bring the
      produce of the distant land to market. A greater quantity of labour,
      therefore, must be maintained out of it; and the surplus, from which are
      drawn both the profit of the farmer and the rent of the landlord, must be
      diminished. But in remote parts of the country, the rate of profit, as has
      already been shewn, is generally higher than in the neighbourhood of a
      large town. A smaller proportion of this diminished surplus, therefore,
      must belong to the landlord.  Good roads, canals, and navigable rivers, by diminishing the expense of
      carriage, put the remote parts of the country more nearly upon a level
      with those in the neighbourhood of the town. They are upon that account
      the greatest of all improvements. They encourage the cultivation of the
      remote, which must always be the most extensive circle of the country.
      They are advantageous to the town by breaking down the monopoly of the
      country in its neighbourhood. They are advantageous even to that part of
      the country. Though they introduce some rival commodities into the old
      market, they open many new markets to its produce. Monopoly, besides, is a
      great enemy to good management, which can never be universally
      established, but in consequence of that free and universal competition
      which forces every body to have recourse to it for the sake of self
      defence. It is not more than fifty years ago, that some of the counties in
      the neighbourhood of London petitioned the parliament against the
      extension of the turnpike roads into the remoter counties. Those remoter
      counties, they pretended, from the cheapness of labour, would be able to
      sell their grass and corn cheaper in the London market than themselves,
      and would thereby reduce their rents, and ruin their cultivation. Their
      rents, however, have risen, and their cultivation has been improved since
      that time.  A corn field of moderate fertility produces a much greater quantity of
      food for man, than the best pasture of equal extent. Though its
      cultivation requires much more labour, yet the surplus which remains after
      replacing the seed and maintaining all that labour, is likewise much
      greater. If a pound of butcher’s meat, therefore, was never supposed to be
      worth more than a pound of bread, this greater surplus would everywhere be
      of greater value and constitute a greater fund, both for the profit of the
      farmer and the rent of the landlord. It seems to have done so universally
      in the rude beginnings of agriculture.  But the relative values of those two different species of food, bread and
      butcher’s meat, are very different in the different periods of
      agriculture. In its rude beginnings, the unimproved wilds, which then
      occupy the far greater part of the country, are all abandoned to cattle.
      There is more butcher’s meat than bread; and bread, therefore, is the food
      for which there is the greatest competition, and which consequently brings
      the greatest price. At Buenos Ayres, we are told by Ulloa, four reals,
      one-and-twenty pence halfpenny sterling, was, forty or fifty years ago,
      the ordinary price of an ox, chosen from a herd of two or three hundred.
      He says nothing of the price of bread, probably because he found nothing
      remarkable about it. An ox there, he says, costs little more than the
      labour of catching him. But corn can nowhere be raised without a great
      deal of labour; and in a country which lies upon the river Plate, at that
      time the direct road from Europe to the silver mines of Potosi, the
      money-price of labour could be very cheap. It is otherwise when
      cultivation is extended over the greater part of the country. There is
      then more bread than butcher’s meat. The competition changes its
      direction, and the price of butcher’s meat becomes greater than the price
      of bread.  By the extension, besides, of cultivation, the unimproved wilds become
      insufficient to supply the demand for butcher’s meat. A great part of the
      cultivated lands must be employed in rearing and fattening cattle; of
      which the price, therefore, must be sufficient to pay, not only the labour
      necessary for tending them, but the rent which the landlord, and the
      profit which the farmer, could have drawn from such land employed in
      tillage. The cattle bred upon the most uncultivated moors, when brought to
      the same market, are, in proportion to their weight or goodness, sold at
      the same price as those which are reared upon the most improved land. The
      proprietors of those moors profit by it, and raise the rent of their land
      in proportion to the price of their cattle. It is not more than a century
      ago, that in many parts of the Highlands of Scotland, butcher’s meat was
      as cheap or cheaper than even bread made of oatmeal. The Union opened the
      market of England to the Highland cattle. Their ordinary price, at
      present, is about three times greater than at the beginning of the
      century, and the rents of many Highland estates have been tripled and
      quadrupled in the same time. In almost every part of Great Britain, a
      pound of the best butcher’s meat is, in the present times, generally worth
      more than two pounds of the best white bread; and in plentiful years it is
      sometimes worth three or four pounds.  It is thus that, in the progress of improvement, the rent and profit of
      unimproved pasture come to be regulated in some measure by the rent and
      profit of what is improved, and these again by the rent and profit of
      corn. Corn is an annual crop; butcher’s meat, a crop which requires four
      or five years to grow. As an acre of land, therefore, will produce a much
      smaller quantity of the one species of food than of the other, the
      inferiority of the quantity must be compensated by the superiority of the
      price. If it was more than compensated, more corn-land would be turned
      into pasture; and if it was not compensated, part of what was in pasture
      would be brought back into corn.  This equality, however, between the rent and profit of grass and those of
      corn; of the land of which the immediate produce is food for cattle, and
      of that of which the immediate produce is food for men, must be understood
      to take place only through the greater part of the improved lands of a
      great country. In some particular local situations it is quite otherwise,
      and the rent and profit of grass are much superior to what can be made by
      corn.  Thus, in the neighbourhood of a great town, the demand for milk, and for
      forage to horses, frequently contribute, together with the high price of
      butcher’s meat, to raise the value of grass above what may be called its
      natural proportion to that of corn. This local advantage, it is evident,
      cannot be communicated to the lands at a distance.  Particular circumstances have sometimes rendered some countries so
      populous, that the whole territory, like the lands in the neighbourhood of
      a great town, has not been sufficient to produce both the grass and the
      corn necessary for the subsistence of their inhabitants. Their lands,
      therefore, have been principally employed in the production of grass, the
      more bulky commodity, and which cannot be so easily brought from a great
      distance; and corn, the food of the great body of the people, has been
      chiefly imported from foreign countries. Holland is at present in this
      situation; and a considerable part of ancient Italy seems to have been so
      during the prosperity of the Romans. To feed well, old Cato said, as we
      are told by Cicero, was the first and most profitable thing in the
      management of a private estate; to feed tolerably well, the second; and to
      feed ill, the third. To plough, he ranked only in the fourth place of
      profit and advantage. Tillage, indeed, in that part of ancient Italy which
      lay in the neighbour hood of Rome, must have been very much discouraged by
      the distributions of corn which were frequently made to the people, either
      gratuitously, or at a very low price. This corn was brought from the
      conquered provinces, of which several, instead of taxes, were obliged to
      furnish a tenth part of their produce at a stated price, about sixpence
      a-peck, to the republic. The low price at which this corn was distributed
      to the people, must necessarily have sunk the price of what could be
      brought to the Roman market from Latium, or the ancient territory of Rome,
      and must have discouraged its cultivation in that country.  In an open country, too, of which the principal produce is corn, a
      well-inclosed piece of grass will frequently rent higher than any corn
      field in its neighbourhood. It is convenient for the maintenance of the
      cattle employed in the cultivation of the corn; and its high rent is, in
      this case, not so properly paid from the value of its own produce, as from
      that of the corn lands which are cultivated by means of it. It is likely
      to fall, if ever the neighbouring lands are completely inclosed. The
      present high rent of inclosed land in Scotland seems owing to the scarcity
      of inclosure, and will probably last no longer than that scarcity. The
      advantage of inclosure is greater for pasture than for corn. It saves the
      labour of guarding the cattle, which feed better, too, when they are not
      liable to be disturbed by their keeper or his dog.  But where there is no local advantage of this kind, the rent and profit of
      corn, or whatever else is the common vegetable food of the people, must
      naturally regulate upon the land which is fit for producing it, the rent
      and profit of pasture.  The use of the artificial grasses, of turnips, carrots, cabbages, and the
      other expedients which have been fallen upon to make an equal quantity of
      land feed a greater number of cattle than when in natural grass, should
      somewhat reduce, it might be expected, the superiority which, in an
      improved country, the price of butcher’s meat naturally has over that of
      bread. It seems accordingly to have done so; and there is some reason for
      believing that, at least in the London market, the price of butcher’s
      meat, in proportion to the price of bread, is a good deal lower in the
      present times than it was in the beginning of the last century.  In the Appendix to the life of Prince Henry, Doctor Birch has given us an
      account of the prices of butcher’s meat as commonly paid by that prince.
      It is there said, that the four quarters of an ox, weighing six hundred
      pounds, usually cost him nine pounds ten shillings, or thereabouts; that
      is thirty-one shillings and eight-pence per hundred pounds weight. Prince
      Henry died on the 6th of November 1612, in the nineteenth year of his age.  In March 1764, there was a parliamentary inquiry into the causes of the
      high price of provisions at that time. It was then, among other proof to
      the same purpose, given in evidence by a Virginia merchant, that in March
      1763, he had victualled his ships for twentyfour or twenty-five shillings
      the hundred weight of beef, which he considered as the ordinary price;
      whereas, in that dear year, he had paid twenty-seven shillings for the
      same weight and sort. This high price in 1764 is, however, four shillings
      and eight-pence cheaper than the ordinary price paid by Prince Henry; and
      it is the best beef only, it must be observed, which is fit to be salted
      for those distant voyages.  The price paid by Prince Henry amounts to 3d. 4/5ths per pound weight of
      the whole carcase, coarse and choice pieces taken together; and at that
      rate the choice pieces could not have been sold by retail for less than
      4½d. or 5d. the pound.  In the parliamentary inquiry in 1764, the witnesses stated the price of
      the choice pieces of the best beef to be to the consumer 4d. and 4½d. the
      pound; and the coarse pieces in general to be from seven farthings to 2½d.
      and 2¾d.; and this, they said, was in general one halfpenny dearer than
      the same sort of pieces had usually been sold in the month of March. But
      even this high price is still a good deal cheaper than what we can well
      suppose the ordinary retail price to have been in the time of Prince
      Henry.  During the first twelve years of the last century, the average price of
      the best wheat at the Windsor market was £ 1:18:3½d. the quarter of nine
      Winchester bushels.  But in the twelve years preceding 1764 including that year, the average
      price of the same measure of the best wheat at the same market was £
      2:1:9½d.  In the first twelve years of the last century, therefore, wheat appears to
      have been a good deal cheaper, and butcher’s meat a good deal dearer, than
      in the twelve years preceding 1764, including that year.  In all great countries, the greater part of the cultivated lands are
      employed in producing either food for men or food for cattle. The rent and
      profit of these regulate the rent and profit of all other cultivated land.
      If any particular produce afforded less, the land would soon be turned
      into corn or pasture; and if any afforded more, some part of the lands in
      corn or pasture would soon be turned to that produce.  Those productions, indeed, which require either a greater original expense
      of improvement, or a greater annual expense of cultivation in order to fit
      the land for them, appear commonly to afford, the one a greater rent, the
      other a greater profit, than corn or pasture. This superiority, however,
      will seldom be found to amount to more than a reasonable interest or
      compensation for this superior expense.  In a hop garden, a fruit garden, a kitchen garden, both the rent of the
      landlord, and the profit of the farmer, are generally greater than in
      acorn or grass field. But to bring the ground into this condition requires
      more expense. Hence a greater rent becomes due to the landlord. It
      requires, too, a more attentive and skilful management. Hence a greater
      profit becomes due to the farmer. The crop, too, at least in the hop and
      fruit garden, is more precarious. Its price, therefore, besides
      compensating all occasional losses, must afford something like the profit
      of insurance. The circumstances of gardeners, generally mean, and always
      moderate, may satisfy us that their great ingenuity is not commonly
      over-recompensed. Their delightful art is practised by so many rich people
      for amusement, that little advantage is to be made by those who practise
      it for profit; because the persons who should naturally be their best
      customers, supply themselves with all their most precious productions.  The advantage which the landlord derives from such improvements, seems at
      no time to have been greater than what was sufficient to compensate the
      original expense of making them. In the ancient husbandry, after the
      vineyard, a well-watered kitchen garden seems to have been the part of the
      farm which was supposed to yield the most valuable produce. But
      Democritus, who wrote upon husbandry about two thousand years ago, and who
      was regarded by the ancients as one of the fathers of the art, thought
      they did not act wisely who inclosed a kitchen garden. The profit, he
      said, would not compensate the expense of a stone-wall: and bricks (he
      meant, I suppose, bricks baked in the sun) mouldered with the rain and the
      winter-storm, and required continual repairs. Columella, who reports this
      judgment of Democritus, does not controvert it, but proposes a very frugal
      method of inclosing with a hedge of brambles and briars, which he says he
      had found by experience to be both a lasting and an impenetrable fence;
      but which, it seems, was not commonly known in the time of Democritus.
      Palladius adopts the opinion of Columella, which had before been
      recommended by Varro. In the judgment of those ancient improvers, the
      produce of a kitchen garden had, it seems, been little more than
      sufficient to pay the extraordinary culture and the expense of watering;
      for in countries so near the sun, it was thought proper, in those times as
      in the present, to have the command of a stream of water, which could be
      conducted to every bed in the garden. Through the greater part of Europe,
      a kitchen garden is not at present supposed to deserve a better inclosure
      than that recommended by Columella. In Great Britain, and some other
      northern countries, the finer fruits cannot be brought to perfection but
      by the assistance of a wall. Their price, therefore, in such countries,
      must be sufficient to pay the expense of building and maintaining what
      they cannot be had without. The fruit-wall frequently surrounds the
      kitchen garden, which thus enjoys the benefit of an inclosure which its
      own produce could seldom pay for.  That the vineyard, when properly planted and brought to perfection, was
      the most valuable part of the farm, seems to have been an undoubted maxim
      in the ancient agriculture, as it is in the modern, through all the wine
      countries. But whether it was advantageous to plant a new vineyard, was a
      matter of dispute among the ancient Italian husbandmen, as we learn from
      Columella. He decides, like a true lover of all curious cultivation, in
      favour of the vineyard; and endeavours to shew, by a comparison of the
      profit and expense, that it was a most advantageous improvement. Such
      comparisons, however, between the profit and expense of new projects are
      commonly very fallacious; and in nothing more so than in agriculture. Had
      the gain actually made by such plantations been commonly as great as he
      imagined it might have been, there could have been no dispute about it.
      The same point is frequently at this day a matter of controversy in the
      wine countries. Their writers on agriculture, indeed, the lovers and
      promoters of high cultivation, seem generally disposed to decide with
      Columella in favour of the vineyard. In France, the anxiety of the
      proprietors of the old vineyards to prevent the planting of any new ones,
      seems to favour their opinion, and to indicate a consciousness in those
      who must have the experience, that this species of cultivation is at
      present in that country more profitable than any other. It seems, at the
      same time, however, to indicate another opinion, that this superior profit
      can last no longer than the laws which at present restrain the free
      cultivation of the vine. In 1731, they obtained an order of council,
      prohibiting both the planting of new vineyards, and the renewal of these
      old ones, of which the cultivation had been interrupted for two years,
      without a particular permission from the king, to be granted only in
      consequence of an information from the intendant of the province,
      certifying that he had examined the land, and that it was incapable of any
      other culture. The pretence of this order was the scarcity of corn and
      pasture, and the superabundance of wine. But had this superabundance been
      real, it would, without any order of council, have effectually prevented
      the plantation of new vineyards, by reducing the profits of this species
      of cultivation below their natural proportion to those of corn and
      pasture. With regard to the supposed scarcity of corn occasioned by the
      multiplication of vineyards, corn is nowhere in France more carefully
      cultivated than in the wine provinces, where the land is fit for producing
      it: as in Burgundy, Guienne, and the Upper Languedoc. The numerous hands
      employed in the one species of cultivation necessarily encourage the
      other, by affording a ready market for its produce. To diminish the number
      of those who are capable of paying it, is surely a most unpromising
      expedient for encouraging the cultivation of corn. It is like the policy
      which would promote agriculture, by discouraging manufactures.  The rent and profit of those productions, therefore, which require either
      a greater original expense of improvement in order to fit the land for
      them, or a greater annual expense of cultivation, though often much
      superior to those of corn and pasture, yet when they do no more than
      compensate such extraordinary expense, are in reality regulated by the
      rent and profit of those common crops.  It sometimes happens, indeed, that the quantity of land which can be
      fitted for some particular produce, is too small to supply the effectual
      demand. The whole produce can be disposed of to those who are willing to
      give somewhat more than what is sufficient to pay the whole rent, wages,
      and profit, necessary for raising and bringing it to market, according to
      their natural rates, or according to the rates at which they are paid in
      the greater part of other cultivated land. The surplus part of the price
      which remains after defraying the whole expense of improvement and
      cultivation, may commonly, in this case, and in this case only, bear no
      regular proportion to the like surplus in corn or pasture, but may exceed
      it in almost any degree; and the greater part of this excess naturally
      goes to the rent of the landlord.  The usual and natural proportion, for example, between the rent and profit
      of wine, and those of corn and pasture, must be understood to take place
      only with regard to those vineyards which produce nothing but good common
      wine, such as can be raised almost anywhere, upon any light, gravelly, or
      sandy soil, and which has nothing to recommend it but its strength and
      wholesomeness. It is with such vineyards only, that the common land of the
      country can be brought into competition; for with those of a peculiar
      quality it is evident that it cannot.  The vine is more affected by the difference of soils than any other
      fruit-tree. From some it derives a flavour which no culture or management
      can equal, it is supposed, upon any other. This flavour, real or
      imaginary, is sometimes peculiar to the produce of a few vineyards;
      sometimes it extends through the greater part of a small district, and
      sometimes through a considerable part of a large province. The whole
      quantity of such wines that is brought to market falls short of the
      effectual demand, or the demand of those who would be willing to pay the
      whole rent, profit, and wages, necessary for preparing and bringing them
      thither, according to the ordinary rate, or according to the rate at which
      they are paid in common vineyards. The whole quantity, therefore, can be
      disposed of to those who are willing to pay more, which necessarily raises
      their price above that of common wine. The difference is greater or less,
      according as the fashionableness and scarcity of the wine render the
      competition of the buyers more or less eager. Whatever it be, the greater
      part of it goes to the rent of the landlord. For though such vineyards are
      in general more carefully cultivated than most others, the high price of
      the wine seems to be, not so much the effect, as the cause of this careful
      cultivation. In so valuable a produce, the loss occasioned by negligence
      is so great, as to force even the most careless to attention. A small part
      of this high price, therefore, is sufficient to pay the wages of the
      extraordinary labour bestowed upon their cultivation, and the profits of
      the extraordinary stock which puts that labour into motion.  The sugar colonies possessed by the European nations in the West Indies
      may be compared to those precious vineyards. Their whole produce falls
      short of the effectual demand of Europe, and can be disposed of to those
      who are willing to give more than what is sufficient to pay the whole
      rent, profit, and wages, necessary for preparing and bringing it to
      market, according to the rate at which they are commonly paid by any other
      produce. In Cochin China, the finest white sugar generally sells for three
      piastres the quintal, about thirteen shillings and sixpence of our money,
      as we are told by Mr Poivre {Voyages d’un Philosophe.}, a very careful
      observer of the agriculture of that country. What is there called the
      quintal, weighs from a hundred and fifty to two hundred Paris pounds, or a
      hundred and seventy-five Paris pounds at a medium, which reduces the price
      of the hundred weight English to about eight shillings sterling; not a
      fourth part of what is commonly paid for the brown or muscovada sugars
      imported from our colonies, and not a sixth part of what is paid for the
      finest white sugar. The greater part of the cultivated lands in Cochin
      China are employed in producing corn and rice, the food of the great body
      of the people. The respective prices of corn, rice, and sugar, are there
      probably in the natural proportion, or in that which naturally takes place
      in the different crops of the greater part of cultivated land, and which
      recompenses the landlord and farmer, as nearly as can be computed,
      according to what is usually the original expense of improvement, and the
      annual expense of cultivation. But in our sugar colonies, the price of
      sugar bears no such proportion to that of the produce of a rice or corn
      field either in Europe or America. It is commonly said that a sugar
      planter expects that the rum and the molasses should defray the whole
      expense of his cultivation, and that his sugar should be all clear profit.
      If this be true, for I pretend not to affirm it, it is as if a corn farmer
      expected to defray the expense of his cultivation with the chaff and the
      straw, and that the grain should be all clear profit. We see frequently
      societies of merchants in London, and other trading towns, purchase waste
      lands in our sugar colonies, which they expect to improve and cultivate
      with profit, by means of factors and agents, notwithstanding the great
      distance and the uncertain returns, from the defective administration of
      justice in those countries. Nobody will attempt to improve and cultivate
      in the same manner the most fertile lands of Scotland, Ireland, or the
      corn provinces of North America, though, from the more exact
      administration of justice in these countries, more regular returns might
      be expected.  In Virginia and Maryland, the cultivation of tobacco is preferred, as most
      profitable, to that of corn. Tobacco might be cultivated with advantage
      through the greater part of Europe; but, in almost every part of Europe,
      it has become a principal subject of taxation; and to collect a tax from
      every different farm in the country where this plant might happen to be
      cultivated, would be more difficult, it has been supposed, than to levy
      one upon its importation at the custom-house. The cultivation of tobacco
      has, upon this account, been most absurdly prohibited through the greater
      part of Europe, which necessarily gives a sort of monopoly to the
      countries where it is allowed; and as Virginia and Maryland produce the
      greatest quantity of it, they share largely, though with some competitors,
      in the advantage of this monopoly. The cultivation of tobacco, however,
      seems not to be so advantageous as that of sugar. I have never even heard
      of any tobacco plantation that was improved and cultivated by the capital
      of merchants who resided in Great Britain; and our tobacco colonies send
      us home no such wealthy planters as we see frequently arrive from our
      sugar islands. Though, from the preference given in those colonies to the
      cultivation of tobacco above that of corn, it would appear that the
      effectual demand of Europe for tobacco is not completely supplied, it
      probably is more nearly so than that for sugar; and though the present
      price of tobacco is probably more than sufficient to pay the whole rent,
      wages, and profit, necessary for preparing and bringing it to market,
      according to the rate at which they are commonly paid in corn land, it
      must not be so much more as the present price of sugar. Our tobacco
      planters, accordingly, have shewn the same fear of the superabundance of
      tobacco, which the proprietors of the old vineyards in France have of the
      superabundance of wine. By act of assembly, they have restrained its
      cultivation to six thousand plants, supposed to yield a thousand weight of
      tobacco, for every negro between sixteen and sixty years of age. Such a
      negro, over and above this quantity of tobacco, can manage, they reckon,
      four acres of Indian corn. To prevent the market from being overstocked,
      too, they have sometimes, in plentiful years, we are told by Dr Douglas
      {Douglas’s Summary, vol. ii. p. 379, 373.} (I suspect he has been ill
      informed), burnt a certain quantity of tobacco for every negro, in the
      same manner as the Dutch are said to do of spices. If such violent methods
      are necessary to keep up the present price of tobacco, the superior
      advantage of its culture over that of corn, if it still has any, will not
      probably be of long continuance.  It is in this manner that the rent of the cultivated land, of which the
      produce is human food, regulates the rent of the greater part of other
      cultivated land. No particular produce can long afford less, because the
      land would immediately be turned to another use; and if any particular
      produce commonly affords more, it is because the quantity of land which
      can be fitted for it is too small to supply the effectual demand.  In Europe, corn is the principal produce of land, which serves immediately
      for human food. Except in particular situations, therefore, the rent of
      corn land regulates in Europe that of all other cultivated land. Britain
      need envy neither the vineyards of France, nor the olive plantations of
      Italy. Except in particular situations, the value of these is regulated by
      that of corn, in which the fertility of Britain is not much inferior to
      that of either of those two countries.  If, in any country, the common and favourite vegetable food of the people
      should be drawn from a plant of which the most common land, with the same,
      or nearly the same culture, produced a much greater quantity than the most
      fertile does of corn; the rent of the landlord, or the surplus quantity of
      food which would remain to him, after paying the labour, and replacing the
      stock of the farmer, together with its ordinary profits, would necessarily
      be much greater. Whatever was the rate at which labour was commonly
      maintained in that country, this greater surplus could always maintain a
      greater quantity of it, and, consequently, enable the landlord to purchase
      or command a greater quantity of it. The real value of his rent, his real
      power and authority, his command of the necessaries and conveniencies of
      life with which the labour of other people could supply him, would
      necessarily be much greater.  A rice field produces a much greater quantity of food than the most
      fertile corn field. Two crops in the year, from thirty to sixty bushels
      each, are said to be the ordinary produce of an acre. Though its
      cultivation, therefore, requires more labour, a much greater surplus
      remains after maintaining all that labour. In those rice countries,
      therefore, where rice is the common and favourite vegetable food of the
      people, and where the cultivators are chiefly maintained with it, a
      greater share of this greater surplus should belong to the landlord than
      in corn countries. In Carolina, where the planters, as in other British
      colonies, are generally both farmers and landlords, and where rent,
      consequently, is confounded with profit, the cultivation of rice is found
      to be more profitable than that of corn, though their fields produce only
      one crop in the year, and though, from the prevalence of the customs of
      Europe, rice is not there the common and favourite vegetable food of the
      people.  A good rice field is a bog at all seasons, and at one season a bog covered
      with water. It is unfit either for corn, or pasture, or vineyard, or,
      indeed, for any other vegetable produce that is very useful to men; and
      the lands which are fit for those purposes are not fit for rice. Even in
      the rice countries, therefore, the rent of rice lands cannot regulate the
      rent of the other cultivated land which can never be turned to that
      produce.  The food produced by a field of potatoes is not inferior in quantity to
      that produced by a field of rice, and much superior to what is produced by
      a field of wheat. Twelve thousand weight of potatoes from an acre of land
      is not a greater produce than two thousand weight of wheat. The food or
      solid nourishment, indeed, which can be drawn from each of those two
      plants, is not altogether in proportion to their weight, on account of the
      watery nature of potatoes. Allowing, however, half the weight of this root
      to go to water, a very large allowance, such an acre of potatoes will
      still produce six thousand weight of solid nourishment, three times the
      quantity produced by the acre of wheat. An acre of potatoes is cultivated
      with less expense than an acre of wheat; the fallow, which generally
      precedes the sowing of wheat, more than compensating the hoeing and other
      extraordinary culture which is always given to potatoes. Should this root
      ever become in any part of Europe, like rice in some rice countries, the
      common and favourite vegetable food of the people, so as to occupy the
      same proportion of the lands in tillage, which wheat and other sorts of
      grain for human food do at present, the same quantity of cultivated land
      would maintain a much greater number of people; and the labourers being
      generally fed with potatoes, a greater surplus would remain after
      replacing all the stock, and maintaining all the labour employed in
      cultivation. A greater share of this surplus, too, would belong to the
      landlord. Population would increase, and rents would rise much beyond what
      they are at present.  The land which is fit for potatoes, is fit for almost every other useful
      vegetable. If they occupied the same proportion of cultivated land which
      corn does at present, they would regulate, in the same manner, the rent of
      the greater part of other cultivated land.  In some parts of Lancashire, it is pretended, I have been told, that bread
      of oatmeal is a heartier food for labouring people than wheaten bread, and
      I have frequently heard the same doctrine held in Scotland. I am, however,
      somewhat doubtful of the truth of it. The common people in Scotland, who
      are fed with oatmeal, are in general neither so strong nor so handsome as
      the same rank of people in England, who are fed with wheaten bread. They
      neither work so well, nor look so well; and as there is not the same
      difference between the people of fashion in the two countries, experience
      would seem to shew, that the food of the common people in Scotland is not
      so suitable to the human constitution as that of their neighbours of the
      same rank in England. But it seems to be otherwise with potatoes. The
      chairmen, porters, and coal-heavers in London, and those unfortunate women
      who live by prostitution, the strongest men and the most beautiful women
      perhaps in the British dominions, are said to be, the greater part of
      them, from the lowest rank of people in Ireland, who are generally fed
      with this root. No food can afford a more decisive proof of its nourishing
      quality, or of its being peculiarly suitable to the health of the human
      constitution.  It is difficult to preserve potatoes through the year, and impossible to
      store them like corn, for two or three years together. The fear of not
      being able to sell them before they rot, discourages their cultivation,
      and is, perhaps, the chief obstacle to their ever becoming in any great
      country, like bread, the principal vegetable food of all the different
      ranks of the people.  PART II.—Of the Produce of Land, which sometimes does, and sometimes
      does not, afford Rent.  Human food seems to be the only produce of land, which always and
      necessarily affords some rent to the landlord. Other sorts of produce
      sometimes may, and sometimes may not, according to different
      circumstances.  After food, clothing and lodging are the two great wants of mankind.  Land, in its original rude state, can afford the materials of clothing and
      lodging to a much greater number of people than it can feed. In its
      improved state, it can sometimes feed a greater number of people than it
      can supply with those materials; at least in the way in which they require
      them, and are willing to pay for them. In the one state, therefore, there
      is always a superabundance of these materials, which are frequently, upon
      that account, of little or no value. In the other, there is often a
      scarcity, which necessarily augments their value. In the one state, a
      great part of them is thrown away as useless and the price of what is used
      is considered as equal only to the labour and expense of fitting it for
      use, and can, therefore, afford no rent to the landlord. In the other,
      they are all made use of, and there is frequently a demand for more than
      can be had. Somebody is always willing to give more for every part of
      them, than what is sufficient to pay the expense of bringing them to
      market. Their price, therefore, can always afford some rent to the
      landlord.  The skins of the larger animals were the original materials of clothing.
      Among nations of hunters and shepherds, therefore, whose food consists
      chiefly in the flesh of those animals, everyman, by providing himself with
      food, provides himself with the materials of more clothing than he can
      wear. If there was no foreign commerce, the greater part of them would be
      thrown away as things of no value. This was probably the case among the
      hunting nations of North America, before their country was discovered by
      the Europeans, with whom they now exchange their surplus peltry, for
      blankets, fire-arms, and brandy, which gives it some value. In the present
      commercial state of the known world, the most barbarous nations, I
      believe, among whom land property is established, have some foreign
      commerce of this kind, and find among their wealthier neighbours such a
      demand for all the materials of clothing, which their land produces, and
      which can neither be wrought up nor consumed at home, as raises their
      price above what it costs to send them to those wealthier neighbours. It
      affords, therefore, some rent to the landlord. When the greater part of
      the Highland cattle were consumed on their own hills, the exportation of
      their hides made the most considerable article of the commerce of that
      country, and what they were exchanged for afforded some addition to the
      rent of the Highland estates. The wool of England, which in old times,
      could neither be consumed nor wrought up at home, found a market in the
      then wealthier and more industrious country of Flanders, and its price
      afforded something to the rent of the land which produced it. In countries
      not better cultivated than England was then, or than the Highlands of
      Scotland are now, and which had no foreign commerce, the materials of
      clothing would evidently be so superabundant, that a great part of them
      would be thrown away as useless, and no part could afford any rent to the
      landlord.  The materials of lodging cannot always be transported to so great a
      distance as those of clothing, and do not so readily become an object of
      foreign commerce. When they are superabundant in the country which
      produces them, it frequently happens, even in the present commercial state
      of the world, that they are of no value to the landlord. A good stone
      quarry in the neighbourhood of London would afford a considerable rent. In
      many parts of Scotland and Wales it affords none. Barren timber for
      building is of great value in a populous and well-cultivated country, and
      the land which produces it affords a considerable rent. But in many parts
      of North America, the landlord would be much obliged to any body who would
      carry away the greater part of his large trees. In some parts of the
      Highlands of Scotland, the bark is the only part of the wood which, for
      want of roads and water-carriage, can be sent to market; the timber is
      left to rot upon the ground. When the materials of lodging are so
      superabundant, the part made use of is worth only the labour and expense
      of fitting it for that use. It affords no rent to the landlord, who
      generally grants the use of it to whoever takes the trouble of asking it.
      The demand of wealthier nations, however, sometimes enables him to get a
      rent for it. The paving of the streets of London has enabled the owners of
      some barren rocks on the coast of Scotland to draw a rent from what never
      afforded any before. The woods of Norway, and of the coasts of the Baltic,
      find a market in many parts of Great Britain, which they could not find at
      home, and thereby afford some rent to their proprietors.  Countries are populous, not in proportion to the number of people whom
      their produce can clothe and lodge, but in proportion to that of those
      whom it can feed. When food is provided, it is easy to find the necessary
      clothing and lodging. But though these are at hand, it may often be
      difficult to find food. In some parts of the British dominions, what is
      called a house may be built by one day’s labour of one man. The simplest
      species of clothing, the skins of animals, require somewhat more labour to
      dress and prepare them for use. They do not, however, require a great
      deal. Among savage or barbarous nations, a hundredth, or little more than
      a hundredth part of the labour of the whole year, will be sufficient to
      provide them with such clothing and lodging as satisfy the greater part of
      the people. All the other ninety-nine parts are frequently no more than
      enough to provide them with food.  But when, by the improvement and cultivation of land, the labour of one
      family can provide food for two, the labour of half the society becomes
      sufficient to provide food for the whole. The other half, therefore, or at
      least the greater part of them, can be employed in providing other things,
      or in satisfying the other wants and fancies of mankind. Clothing and
      lodging, household furniture, and what is called equipage, are the
      principal objects of the greater part of those wants and fancies. The rich
      man consumes no more food than his poor neighbour. In quality it may be
      very different, and to select and prepare it may require more labour and
      art; but in quantity it is very nearly the same. But compare the spacious
      palace and great wardrobe of the one, with the hovel and the few rags of
      the other, and you will be sensible that the difference between their
      clothing, lodging, and household furniture, is almost as great in quantity
      as it is in quality. The desire of food is limited in every man by the
      narrow capacity of the human stomach; but the desire of the conveniencies
      and ornaments of building, dress, equipage, and household furniture, seems
      to have no limit or certain boundary. Those, therefore, who have the
      command of more food than they themselves can consume, are always willing
      to exchange the surplus, or, what is the same thing, the price of it, for
      gratifications of this other kind. What is over and above satisfying the
      limited desire, is given for the amusement of those desires which cannot
      be satisfied, but seem to be altogether endless. The poor, in order to
      obtain food, exert themselves to gratify those fancies of the rich; and to
      obtain it more certainly, they vie with one another in the cheapness and
      perfection of their work. The number of workmen increases with the
      increasing quantity of food, or with the growing improvement and
      cultivation of the lands; and as the nature of their business admits of
      the utmost subdivisions of labour, the quantity of materials which they
      can work up, increases in a much greater proportion than their numbers.
      Hence arises a demand for every sort of material which human invention can
      employ, either usefully or ornamentally, in building, dress, equipage, or
      household furniture; for the fossils and minerals contained in the bowels
      of the earth, the precious metals, and the precious stones.  Food is, in this manner, not only the original source of rent, but every
      other part of the produce of land which afterwards affords rent, derives
      that part of its value from the improvement of the powers of labour in
      producing food, by means of the improvement and cultivation of land.  Those other parts of the produce of land, however, which afterwards afford
      rent, do not afford it always. Even in improved and cultivated countries,
      the demand for them is not always such as to afford a greater price than
      what is sufficient to pay the labour, and replace, together with its
      ordinary profits, the stock which must be employed in bringing them to
      market. Whether it is or is not such, depends upon different
      circumstances.  Whether a coal mine, for example, can afford any rent, depends partly upon
      its fertility, and partly upon its situation.  A mine of any kind may be said to be either fertile or barren, according
      as the quantity of mineral which can be brought from it by a certain
      quantity of labour, is greater or less than what can be brought by an
      equal quantity from the greater part of other mines of the same kind.  Some coal mines, advantageously situated, cannot be wrought on account of
      their barrenness. The produce does not pay the expense. They can afford
      neither profit nor rent.  There are some, of which the produce is barely sufficient to pay the
      labour, and replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock
      employed in working them. They afford some profit to the undertaker of the
      work, but no rent to the landlord. They can be wrought advantageously by
      nobody but the landlord, who, being himself the undertaker of the work,
      gets the ordinary profit of the capital which he employs in it. Many coal
      mines in Scotland are wrought in this manner, and can be wrought in no
      other. The landlord will allow nobody else to work them without paying
      some rent, and nobody can afford to pay any.  Other coal mines in the same country, sufficiently fertile, cannot be
      wrought on account of their situation. A quantity of mineral, sufficient
      to defray the expense of working, could be brought from the mine by the
      ordinary, or even less than the ordinary quantity of labour: but in an
      inland country, thinly inhabited, and without either good roads or
      water-carriage, this quantity could not be sold.  Coals are a less agreeable fuel than wood: they are said too to be less
      wholesome. The expense of coals, therefore, at the place where they are
      consumed, must generally be somewhat less than that of wood.  The price of wood, again, varies with the state of agriculture, nearly in
      the same manner, and exactly for the same reason, as the price of cattle.
      In its rude beginnings, the greater part of every country is covered with
      wood, which is then a mere incumbrance, of no value to the landlord, who
      would gladly give it to any body for the cutting. As agriculture advances,
      the woods are partly cleared by the progress of tillage, and partly go to
      decay in consequence of the increased number of cattle. These, though they
      do not increase in the same proportion as corn, which is altogether the
      acquisition of human industry, yet multiply under the care and protection
      of men, who store up in the season of plenty what may maintain them in
      that of scarcity; who, through the whole year, furnish them with a greater
      quantity of food than uncultivated nature provides for them; and who, by
      destroying and extirpating their enemies, secure them in the free
      enjoyment of all that she provides. Numerous herds of cattle, when allowed
      to wander through the woods, though they do not destroy the old trees,
      hinder any young ones from coming up; so that, in the course of a century
      or two, the whole forest goes to ruin. The scarcity of wood then raises
      its price. It affords a good rent; and the landlord sometimes finds that
      he can scarce employ his best lands more advantageously than in growing
      barren timber, of which the greatness of the profit often compensates the
      lateness of the returns. This seems, in the present times, to be nearly
      the state of things in several parts of Great Britain, where the profit of
      planting is found to be equal to that of either corn or pasture. The
      advantage which the landlord derives from planting can nowhere exceed, at
      least for any considerable time, the rent which these could afford him;
      and in an inland country, which is highly cultivated, it will frequently
      not fall much short of this rent. Upon the sea-coast of a well-improved
      country, indeed, if coals can conveniently be had for fuel, it may
      sometimes be cheaper to bring barren timber for building from less
      cultivated foreign countries than to raise it at home. In the new town of
      Edinburgh, built within these few years, there is not, perhaps, a single
      stick of Scotch timber.  Whatever may be the price of wood, if that of coals is such that the
      expense of a coal fire is nearly equal to that of a wood one we may be
      assured, that at that place, and in these circumstances, the price of
      coals is as high as it can be. It seems to be so in some of the inland
      parts of England, particularly in Oxfordshire, where it is usual, even in
      the fires of the common people, to mix coals and wood together, and where
      the difference in the expense of those two sorts of fuel cannot,
      therefore, be very great. Coals, in the coal countries, are everywhere
      much below this highest price. If they were not, they could not bear the
      expense of a distant carriage, either by land or by water. A small
      quantity only could be sold; and the coal masters and the coal proprietors
      find it more for their interest to sell a great quantity at a price
      somewhat above the lowest, than a small quantity at the highest. The most
      fertile coal mine, too, regulates the price of coals at all the other
      mines in its neighbourhood. Both the proprietor and the undertaker of the
      work find, the one that he can get a greater rent, the other that he can
      get a greater profit, by somewhat underselling all their neighbours. Their
      neighbours are soon obliged to sell at the same price, though they cannot
      so well afford it, and though it always diminishes, and sometimes takes
      away altogether, both their rent and their profit. Some works are
      abandoned altogether; others can afford no rent, and can be wrought only
      by the proprietor.  The lowest price at which coals can be sold for any considerable time, is,
      like that of all other commodities, the price which is barely sufficient
      to replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock which must be
      employed in bringing them to market. At a coal mine for which the landlord
      can get no rent, but, which he must either work himself or let it alone
      altogether, the price of coals must generally be nearly about this price.  Rent, even where coals afford one, has generally a smaller share in their
      price than in that of most other parts of the rude produce of land. The
      rent of an estate above ground, commonly amounts to what is supposed to be
      a third of the gross produce; and it is generally a rent certain and
      independent of the occasional variations in the crop. In coal mines, a
      fifth of the gross produce is a very great rent, a tenth the common rent;
      and it is seldom a rent certain, but depends upon the occasional
      variations in the produce. These are so great, that in a country where
      thirty years purchase is considered as a moderate price for the property
      of a landed estate, ten years purchase is regarded as a good price for
      that of a coal mine.  The value of a coal mine to the proprietor, frequently depends as much
      upon its situation as upon its fertility. That of a metallic mine depends
      more upon its fertility, and less upon its situation. The coarse, and
      still more the precious metals, when separated from the ore, are so
      valuable, that they can generally bear the expense of a very long land,
      and of the most distant sea carriage. Their market is not confined to the
      countries in the neighbourhood of the mine, but extends to the whole
      world. The copper of Japan makes an article of commerce in Europe; the
      iron of Spain in that of Chili and Peru. The silver of Peru finds its way,
      not only to Europe, but from Europe to China.  The price of coals in Westmoreland or Shropshire can have little effect on
      their price at Newcastle; and their price in the Lionnois can have none at
      all. The productions of such distant coal mines can never be brought into
      competition with one another. But the productions of the most distant
      metallic mines frequently may, and in fact commonly are.  The price, therefore, of the coarse, and still more that of the precious
      metals, at the most fertile mines in the world, must necessarily more or
      less affect their price at every other in it. The price of copper in Japan
      must have some influence upon its price at the copper mines in Europe. The
      price of silver in Peru, or the quantity either of labour or of other
      goods which it will purchase there, must have some influence on its price,
      not only at the silver mines of Europe, but at those of China. After the
      discovery of the mines of Peru, the silver mines of Europe were, the
      greater part of them, abandoned. The value of silver was so much reduced,
      that their produce could no longer pay the expense of working them, or
      replace, with a profit, the food, clothes, lodging, and other necessaries
      which were consumed in that operation. This was the case, too, with the
      mines of Cuba and St. Domingo, and even with the ancient mines of Peru,
      after the discovery of those of Potosi. The price of every metal, at every
      mine, therefore, being regulated in some measure by its price at the most
      fertile mine in the world that is actually wrought, it can, at the greater
      part of mines, do very little more than pay the expense of working, and
      can seldom afford a very high rent to the landlord. Rent accordingly,
      seems at the greater part of mines to have but a small share in the price
      of the coarse, and a still smaller in that of the precious metals. Labour
      and profit make up the greater part of both.  A sixth part of the gross produce may be reckoned the average rent of the
      tin mines of Cornwall, the most fertile that are known in the world, as we
      are told by the Rev. Mr. Borlace, vice-warden of the stannaries. Some, he
      says, afford more, and some do not afford so much. A sixth part of the
      gross produce is the rent, too, of several very fertile lead mines in
      Scotland.  In the silver mines of Peru, we are told by Frezier and Ulloa, the
      proprietor frequently exacts no other acknowledgment from the undertaker
      of the mine, but that he will grind the ore at his mill, paying him the
      ordinary multure or price of grinding. Till 1736, indeed, the tax of the
      king of Spain amounted to one fifth of the standard silver, which till
      then might be considered as the real rent of the greater part of the
      silver mines of Peru, the richest which have been known in the world. If
      there had been no tax, this fifth would naturally have belonged to the
      landlord, and many mines might have been wrought which could not then be
      wrought, because they could not afford this tax. The tax of the duke of
      Cornwall upon tin is supposed to amount to more than five per cent. or one
      twentieth part of the value; and whatever may be his proportion, it would
      naturally, too, belong to the proprietor of the mine, if tin was duty
      free. But if you add one twentieth to one sixth, you will find that the
      whole average rent of the tin mines of Cornwall, was to the whole average
      rent of the silver mines of Peru, as thirteen to twelve. But the silver
      mines of Peru are not now able to pay even this low rent; and the tax upon
      silver was, in 1736, reduced from one fifth to one tenth. Even this tax
      upon silver, too, gives more temptation to smuggling than the tax of one
      twentieth upon tin; and smuggling must be much easier in the precious than
      in the bulky commodity. The tax of the king of Spain, accordingly, is said
      to be very ill paid, and that of the duke of Cornwall very well. Rent,
      therefore, it is probable, makes a greater part of the price of tin at the
      most fertile tin mines than it does of silver at the most fertile silver
      mines in the world. After replacing the stock employed in working those
      different mines, together with its ordinary profits, the residue which
      remains to the proprietor is greater, it seems, in the coarse, than in the
      precious metal.  Neither are the profits of the undertakers of silver mines commonly very
      great in Peru. The same most respectable and well-informed authors
      acquaint us, that when any person undertakes to work a new mine in Peru,
      he is universally looked upon as a man destined to bankruptcy and ruin,
      and is upon that account shunned and avoided by every body. Mining, it
      seems, is considered there in the same light as here, as a lottery, in
      which the prizes do not compensate the blanks, though the greatness of
      some tempts many adventurers to throw away their fortunes in such
      unprosperous projects.  As the sovereign, however, derives a considerable part of his revenue from
      the produce of silver mines, the law in Peru gives every possible
      encouragement to the discovery and working of new ones. Whoever discovers
      a new mine, is entitled to measure off two hundred and forty-six feet in
      length, according to what he supposes to be the direction of the vein, and
      half as much in breadth. He becomes proprietor of this portion of the
      mine, and can work it without paving any acknowledgment to the landlord.
      The interest of the duke of Cornwall has given occasion to a regulation
      nearly of the same kind in that ancient dutchy. In waste and uninclosed
      lands, any person who discovers a tin mine may mark out its limits to a
      certain extent, which is called bounding a mine. The bounder becomes the
      real proprietor of the mine, and may either work it himself, or give it in
      lease to another, without the consent of the owner of the land, to whom,
      however, a very small acknowledgment must be paid upon working it. In both
      regulations, the sacred rights of private property are sacrificed to the
      supposed interests of public revenue.  The same encouragement is given in Peru to the discovery and working of
      new gold mines; and in gold the king’s tax amounts only to a twentieth
      part of the standard rental. It was once a fifth, and afterwards a tenth,
      as in silver; but it was found that the work could not bear even the
      lowest of these two taxes. If it is rare, however, say the same authors,
      Frezier and Ulloa, to find a person who has made his fortune by a silver,
      it is still much rarer to find one who has done so by a gold mine. This
      twentieth part seems to be the whole rent which is paid by the greater
      part of the gold mines of Chili and Peru. Gold, too, is much more liable
      to be smuggled than even silver; not only on account of the superior value
      of the metal in proportion to its bulk, but on account of the peculiar way
      in which nature produces it. Silver is very seldom found virgin, but, like
      most other metals, is generally mineralized with some other body, from
      which it is impossible to separate it in such quantities as will pay for
      the expense, but by a very laborious and tedious operation, which cannot
      well be carried on but in work-houses erected for the purpose, and,
      therefore, exposed to the inspection of the king’s officers. Gold, on the
      contrary, is almost always found virgin. It is sometimes found in pieces
      of some bulk; and, even when mixed, in small and almost insensible
      particles, with sand, earth, and other extraneous bodies, it can be
      separated from them by a very short and simple operation, which can be
      carried on in any private house by any body who is possessed of a small
      quantity of mercury. If the king’s tax, therefore, is but ill paid upon
      silver, it is likely to be much worse paid upon gold; and rent must make a
      much smaller part of the price of gold than that of silver.  The lowest price at which the precious metals can be sold, or the smallest
      quantity of other goods for which they can be exchanged, during any
      considerable time, is regulated by the same principles which fix the
      lowest ordinary price of all other goods. The stock which must commonly be
      employed, the food, clothes, and lodging, which must commonly be consumed
      in bringing them from the mine to the market, determine it. It must at
      least be sufficient to replace that stock, with the ordinary profits.  Their highest price, however, seems not to be necessarily determined by
      any thing but the actual scarcity or plenty of these metals themselves. It
      is not determined by that of any other commodity, in the same manner as
      the price of coals is by that of wood, beyond which no scarcity can ever
      raise it. Increase the scarcity of gold to a certain degree, and the
      smallest bit of it may become more precious than a diamond, and exchange
      for a greater quantity of other goods.  The demand for those metals arises partly from their utility, and partly
      from their beauty. If you except iron, they are more useful than, perhaps,
      any other metal. As they are less liable to rust and impurity, they can
      more easily be kept clean; and the utensils, either of the table or the
      kitchen, are often, upon that account, more agreeable when made of them. A
      silver boiler is more cleanly than a lead, copper, or tin one; and the
      same quality would render a gold boiler still better than a silver one.
      Their principal merit, however, arises from their beauty, which renders
      them peculiarly fit for the ornaments of dress and furniture. No paint or
      dye can give so splendid a colour as gilding. The merit of their beauty is
      greatly enhanced by their scarcity. With the greater part of rich people,
      the chief enjoyment of riches consists in the parade of riches; which, in
      their eye, is never so complete as when they appear to possess those
      decisive marks of opulence which nobody can possess but themselves. In
      their eyes, the merit of an object, which is in any degree either useful
      or beautiful, is greatly enhanced by its scarcity, or by the great labour
      which it requires to collect any considerable quantity of it; a labour
      which nobody can afford to pay but themselves. Such objects they are
      willing to purchase at a higher price than things much more beautiful and
      useful, but more common. These qualities of utility, beauty, and scarcity,
      are the original foundation of the high price of those metals, or of the
      great quantity of other goods for which they can everywhere be exchanged.
      This value was antecedent to, and independent of their being employed as
      coin, and was the quality which fitted them for that employment. That
      employment, however, by occasioning a new demand, and by diminishing the
      quantity which could be employed in any other way, may have afterwards
      contributed to keep up or increase their value.  The demand for the precious stones arises altogether from their beauty.
      They are of no use but as ornaments; and the merit of their beauty is
      greatly enhanced by their scarcity, or by the difficulty and expense of
      getting them from the mine. Wages and profit accordingly make up, upon
      most occasions, almost the whole of the high price. Rent comes in but for
      a very small share, frequently for no share; and the most fertile mines
      only afford any considerable rent. When Tavernier, a jeweller, visited the
      diamond mines of Golconda and Visiapour, he was informed that the
      sovereign of the country, for whose benefit they were wrought, had ordered
      all of them to be shut up except those which yielded the largest and
      finest stones. The other, it seems, were to the proprietor not worth the
      working.  As the prices, both of the precious metals and of the precious stones, is
      regulated all over the world by their price at the most fertile mine in
      it, the rent which a mine of either can afford to its proprietor is in
      proportion, not to its absolute, but to what may be called its relative
      fertility, or to its superiority over other mines of the same kind. If new
      mines were discovered, as much superior to those of Potosi, as they were
      superior to those of Europe, the value of silver might be so much degraded
      as to render even the mines of Potosi not worth the working. Before the
      discovery of the Spanish West Indies, the most fertile mines in Europe may
      have afforded as great a rent to their proprietors as the richest mines in
      Peru do at present. Though the quantity of silver was much less, it might
      have exchanged for an equal quantity of other goods, and the proprietor’s
      share might have enabled him to purchase or command an equal quantity
      either of labour or of commodities.  The value, both of the produce and of the rent, the real revenue which
      they afforded, both to the public and to the proprietor, might have been
      the same.  The most abundant mines, either of the precious metals, or of the precious
      stones, could add little to the wealth of the world. A produce, of which
      the value is principally derived from its scarcity, is necessarily
      degraded by its abundance. A service of plate, and the other frivolous
      ornaments of dress and furniture, could be purchased for a smaller
      quantity of commodities; and in this would consist the sole advantage
      which the world could derive from that abundance.  It is otherwise in estates above ground. The value, both of their produce
      and of their rent, is in proportion to their absolute, and not to their
      relative fertility. The land which produces a certain quantity of food,
      clothes, and lodging, can always feed, clothe, and lodge, a certain number
      of people; and whatever may be the proportion of the landlord, it will
      always give him a proportionable command of the labour of those people,
      and of the commodities with which that labour can supply him. The value of
      the most barren land is not diminished by the neighbourhood of the most
      fertile. On the contrary, it is generally increased by it. The great
      number of people maintained by the fertile lands afford a market to many
      parts of the produce of the barren, which they could never have found
      among those whom their own produce could maintain.  Whatever increases the fertility of land in producing food, increases not
      only the value of the lands upon which the improvement is bestowed, but
      contributes likewise to increase that of many other lands, by creating a
      new demand for their produce. That abundance of food, of which, in
      consequence of the improvement of land, many people have the disposal
      beyond what they themselves can consume, is the great cause of the demand,
      both for the precious metals and the precious stones, as well as for every
      other conveniency and ornament of dress, lodging, household furniture, and
      equipage. Food not only constitutes the principal part of the riches of
      the world, but it is the abundance of food which gives the principal part
      of their value to many other sorts of riches. The poor inhabitants of Cuba
      and St. Domingo, when they were first discovered by the Spaniards, used to
      wear little bits of gold as ornaments in their hair and other parts of
      their dress. They seemed to value them as we would do any little pebbles
      of somewhat more than ordinary beauty, and to consider them as just worth
      the picking up, but not worth the refusing to any body who asked them,
      They gave them to their new guests at the first request, without seeming
      to think that they had made them any very valuable present. They were
      astonished to observe the rage of the Spaniards to obtain them; and had no
      notion that there could anywhere be a country in which many people had the
      disposal of so great a superfluity of food; so scanty always among
      themselves, that, for a very small quantity of those glittering baubles,
      they would willingly give as much as might maintain a whole family for
      many years. Could they have been made to understand this, the passion of
      the Spaniards would not have surprised them.  PART III.—Of the variations in the Proportion between the respective
      Values of that sort of Produce which always affords Rent, and of that
      which sometimes does, and sometimes does not, afford Rent.  The increasing abundance of food, in consequence of the increasing
      improvement and cultivation, must necessarily increase the demand for
      every part of the produce of land which is not food, and which can be
      applied either to use or to ornament. In the whole progress of
      improvement, it might, therefore, be expected there should be only one
      variation in the comparative values of those two different sorts of
      produce. The value of that sort which sometimes does, and sometimes does
      not afford rent, should constantly rise in proportion to that which always
      affords some rent. As art and industry advance, the materials of clothing
      and lodging, the useful fossils and materials of the earth, the precious
      metals and the precious stones, should gradually come to be more and more
      in demand, should gradually exchange for a greater and a greater quantity
      of food; or, in other words, should gradually become dearer and dearer.
      This, accordingly, has been the case with most of these things upon most
      occasions, and would have been the case with all of them upon all
      occasions, if particular accidents had not, upon some occasions, increased
      the supply of some of them in a still greater proportion than the demand.  The value of a free-stone quarry, for example, will necessarily increase
      with the increasing improvement and population of the country round about
      it, especially if it should be the only one in the neighbourhood. But the
      value of a silver mine, even though there should not be another within a
      thousand miles of it, will not necessarily increase with the improvement
      of the country in which it is situated. The market for the produce of a
      free-stone quarry can seldom extend more than a few miles round about it,
      and the demand must generally be in proportion to the improvement and
      population of that small district; but the market for the produce of a
      silver mine may extend over the whole known world. Unless the world in
      general, therefore, be advancing in improvement and population, the demand
      for silver might not be at all increased by the improvement even of a
      large country in the neighbourhood of the mine. Even though the world in
      general were improving, yet if, in the course of its improvements, new
      mines should be discovered, much more fertile than any which had been
      known before, though the demand for silver would necessarily increase, yet
      the supply might increase in so much a greater proportion, that the real
      price of that metal might gradually fall; that is, any given quantity, a
      pound weight of it, for example, might gradually purchase or command a
      smaller and a smaller quantity of labour, or exchange for a smaller and a
      smaller quantity of corn, the principal part of the subsistence of the
      labourer.  The great market for silver is the commercial and civilized part of the
      world.  If, by the general progress of improvement, the demand of this market
      should increase, while, at the same time, the supply did not increase in
      the same proportion, the value of silver would gradually rise in
      proportion to that of corn. Any given quantity of silver would exchange
      for a greater and a greater quantity of corn; or, in other words, the
      average money price of corn would gradually become cheaper and cheaper.  If, on the contrary, the supply, by some accident, should increase, for
      many years together, in a greater proportion than the demand, that metal
      would gradually become cheaper and cheaper; or, in other words, the
      average money price of corn would, in spite of all improvements, gradually
      become dearer and dearer.  But if, on the other hand, the supply of that metal should increase nearly
      in the same proportion as the demand, it would continue to purchase or
      exchange for nearly the same quantity of corn; and the average money price
      of corn would, in spite of all improvements. continue very nearly the
      same.  These three seem to exhaust all the possible combinations of events which
      can happen in the progress of improvement; and during the course of the
      four centuries preceding the present, if we may judge by what has happened
      both in France and Great Britain, each of those three different
      combinations seems to have taken place in the European market, and nearly
      in the same order, too, in which I have here set them down.   Digression concerning the Variations in the value of Silver during the
      Course of the Four last Centuries.   First Period.—In 1350, and for some time before, the average price
      of the quarter of wheat in England seems not to have been estimated lower
      than four ounces of silver, Tower weight, equal to about twenty shillings
      of our present money. From this price it seems to have fallen gradually to
      two ounces of silver, equal to about ten shillings of our present money,
      the price at which we find it estimated in the beginning of the sixteenth
      century, and at which it seems to have continued to be estimated till
      about 1570.  In 1350, being the 25th of Edward III. was enacted what is called the
      Statute of Labourers. In the preamble, it complains much of the insolence
      of servants, who endeavoured to raise their wages upon their masters. It
      therefore ordains, that all servants and labourers should, for the future,
      be contented with the same wages and liveries (liveries in those times
      signified not only clothes, but provisions) which they had been accustomed
      to receive in the 20th year of the king, and the four preceding years;
      that, upon this account, their livery-wheat should nowhere be estimated
      higher than tenpence a-bushel, and that it should always be in the option
      of the master to deliver them either the wheat or the money. Tenpence:
      a-bushel, therefore, had, in the 25th of Edward III. been reckoned a very
      moderate price of wheat, since it required a particular statute to oblige
      servants to accept of it in exchange for their usual livery of provisions;
      and it had been reckoned a reasonable price ten years before that, or in
      the 16th year of the king, the term to which the statute refers. But in
      the 16th year of Edward III. tenpence contained about half an ounce of
      silver, Tower weight, and was nearly equal to half-a-crown of our present
      money. Four ounces of silver, Tower weight, therefore, equal to six
      shillings and eightpence of the money of those times, and to near twenty
      shillings of that of the present, must have been reckoned a moderate price
      for the quarter of eight bushels.  This statute is surely a better evidence of what was reckoned, in those
      times, a moderate price of grain, than the prices of some particular
      years, which have generally been recorded by historians and other writers,
      on account of their extraordinary dearness or cheapness, and from which,
      therefore, it is difficult to form any judgment concerning what may have
      been the ordinary price. There are, besides, other reasons for believing
      that, in the beginning of the fourteenth century, and for some time
      before, the common price of wheat was not less than four ounces of silver
      the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion.  In 1309, Ralph de Born, prior of St Augustine’s, Canterbury, gave a feast
      upon his installation-day, of which William Thorn has preserved, not only
      the bill of fare, but the prices of many particulars. In that feast were
      consumed, 1st, fifty-three quarters of wheat, which cost nineteen pounds,
      or seven shillings, and twopence a-quarter, equal to about one-and-twenty
      shillings and sixpence of our present money; 2dly, fifty-eight quarters of
      malt, which cost seventeen pounds ten shillings, or six shillings
      a-quarter, equal to about eighteen shillings of our present money; 3dly,
      twenty quarters of oats, which cost four pounds, or four shillings
      a-quarter, equal to about twelve shillings of our present money. The
      prices of malt and oats seem here to lie higher than their ordinary
      proportion to the price of wheat.  These prices are not recorded, on account of their extraordinary dearness
      or cheapness, but are mentioned accidentally, as the prices actually paid
      for large quantities of grain consumed at a feast, which was famous for
      its magnificence.  In 1262, being the 51st of Henry III. was revived an ancient statute,
      called the assize of bread and ale, which, the king says in the preamble,
      had been made in the times of his progenitors, some time kings of England.
      It is probably, therefore, as old at least as the time of his grandfather,
      Henry II. and may have been as old as the Conquest. It regulates the price
      of bread according as the prices of wheat may happen to be, from one
      shilling to twenty shillings the quarter of the money of those times. But
      statutes of this kind are generally presumed to provide with equal care
      for all deviations from the middle price, for those below it, as well as
      for those above it. Ten shillings, therefore, containing six ounces of
      silver, Tower weight, and equal to about thirty shillings of our present
      money, must, upon this supposition, have been reckoned the middle price of
      the quarter of wheat when this statute was first enacted, and must have
      continued to be so in the 51st of Henry III. We cannot, therefore, be very
      wrong in supposing that the middle price was not less than one-third of
      the highest price at which this statute regulates the price of bread, or
      than six shillings and eightpence of the money of those times, containing
      four ounces of silver, Tower weight.  From these different facts, therefore, we seem to have some reason to
      conclude that, about the middle of the fourteenth century, and for a
      considerable time before, the average or ordinary price of the quarter of
      wheat was not supposed to be less than four ounces of silver, Tower
      weight.  From about the middle of the fourteenth to the beginning of the sixteenth
      century, what was reckoned the reasonable and moderate, that is, the
      ordinary or average price of wheat, seems to have sunk gradually to about
      one half of this price; so as at last to have fallen to about two ounces
      of silver, Tower weight, equal to about ten shillings of our present
      money. It continued to be estimated at this price till about 1570.  In the household book of Henry, the fifth earl of Northumberland, drawn up
      in 1512 there are two different estimations of wheat. In one of them it is
      computed at six shilling and eightpence the quarter, in the other at five
      shillings and eightpence only. In 1512, six shillings and eightpence
      contained only two ounces of silver, Tower weight, and were equal to about
      ten shillings of our present money.  From the 25th of Edward III. to the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth,
      during the space of more than two hundred years, six shillings and
      eightpence, it appears from several different statutes, had continued to
      be considered as what is called the moderate and reasonable, that is, the
      ordinary or average price of wheat. The quantity of silver, however,
      contained in that nominal sum was, during the course of this period,
      continually diminishing in consequence of some alterations which were made
      in the coin. But the increase of the value of silver had, it seems, so far
      compensated the diminution of the quantity of it contained in the same
      nominal sum, that the legislature did not think it worth while to attend
      to this circumstance.  Thus, in 1436, it was enacted, that wheat might be exported without a
      licence when the price was so low as six shillings and eightpence: and in
      1463, it was enacted, that no wheat should be imported if the price was
      not above six shillings and eightpence the quarter: The legislature had
      imagined, that when the price was so low, there could be no inconveniency
      in exportation, but that when it rose higher, it became prudent to allow
      of importation. Six shillings and eightpence, therefore, containing about
      the same quantity of silver as thirteen shillings and fourpence of our
      present money (one-third part less than the same nominal sum contained in
      the time of Edward III), had, in those times, been considered as what is
      called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat.  In 1554, by the 1st and 2nd of Philip and Mary, and in 1558, by the 1st of
      Elizabeth, the exportation of wheat was in the same manner prohibited,
      whenever the price of the quarter should exceed six shillings and
      eightpence, which did not then contain two penny worth more silver than
      the same nominal sum does at present. But it had soon been found, that to
      restrain the exportation of wheat till the price was so very low, was, in
      reality, to prohibit it altogether. In 1562, therefore, by the 5th of
      Elizabeth, the exportation of wheat was allowed from certain ports,
      whenever the price of the quarter should not exceed ten shillings,
      containing nearly the same quantity of silver as the like nominal sum does
      at present. This price had at this time, therefore, been considered as
      what is called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat. It agrees
      nearly with the estimation of the Northumberland book in 1512.  That in France the average price of grain was, in the same manner, much
      lower in the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century,
      than in the two centuries preceding, has been observed both by Mr Dupré de
      St Maur, and by the elegant author of the Essay on the Policy of Grain.
      Its price, during the same period, had probably sunk in the same manner
      through the greater part of Europe.  This rise in the value of silver, in proportion to that of corn, may
      either have been owing altogether to the increase of the demand for that
      metal, in consequence of increasing improvement and cultivation, the
      supply, in the mean time, continuing the same as before; or, the demand
      continuing the same as before, it may have been owing altogether to the
      gradual diminution of the supply: the greater part of the mines which were
      then known in the world being much exhausted, and, consequently, the
      expense of working them much increased; or it may have been owing partly
      to the one, and partly to the other of those two circumstances. In the end
      of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries, the greater
      part of Europe was approaching towards a more settled form of government
      than it had enjoyed for several ages before. The increase of security
      would naturally increase industry and improvement; and the demand for the
      precious metals, as well as for every other luxury and ornament, would
      naturally increase with the increase of riches. A greater annual produce
      would require a greater quantity of coin to circulate it; and a greater
      number of rich people would require a greater quantity of plate and other
      ornaments of silver. It is natural to suppose, too, that the greater part
      of the mines which then supplied the European market with silver might be
      a good deal exhausted, and have become more expensive in the working. They
      had been wrought, many of them, from the time of the Romans.  It has been the opinion, however, of the greater part of those who have
      written upon the prices of commodities in ancient times, that, from the
      Conquest, perhaps from the invasion of Julius Caesar, till the discovery
      of the mines of America, the value of silver was continually diminishing.
      This opinion they seem to have been led into, partly by the observations
      which they had occasion to make upon the prices both of corn and of some
      other parts of the rude produce of land, and partly by the popular notion,
      that as the quantity of silver naturally increases in every country with
      the increase of wealth, so its value diminishes as it quantity increases.  In their observations upon the prices of corn, three different
      circumstances seem frequently to have misled them.  First, in ancient times, almost all rents were paid in kind; in a certain
      quantity of corn, cattle, poultry, etc. It sometimes happened, however,
      that the landlord would stipulate, that he should be at liberty to demand
      of the tenant, either the annual payment in kind or a certain sum of money
      instead of it. The price at which the payment in kind was in this manner
      exchanged for a certain sum of money, is in Scotland called the conversion
      price. As the option is always in the landlord to take either the
      substance or the price, it is necessary, for the safety of the tenant,
      that the conversion price should rather be below than above the average
      market price. In many places, accordingly, it is not much above one half
      of this price. Through the greater part of Scotland this custom still
      continues with regard to poultry, and in some places with regard to
      cattle. It might probably have continued to take place, too, with regard
      to corn, had not the institution of the public fiars put an end to it.
      These are annual valuations, according to the judgment of an assize, of
      the average price of all the different sorts of grain, and of all the
      different qualities of each, according to the actual market price in every
      different county. This institution rendered it sufficiently safe for the
      tenant, and much more convenient for the landlord, to convert, as they
      call it, the corn rent, rather at what should happen to be the price of
      the fiars of each year, than at any certain fixed price. But the writers
      who have collected the prices of corn in ancient times seem frequently to
      have mistaken what is called in Scotland the conversion price for the
      actual market price. Fleetwood acknowledges, upon one occasion, that he
      had made this mistake. As he wrote his book, however, for a particular
      purpose, he does not think proper to make this acknowledgment till after
      transcribing this conversion price fifteen times. The price is eight
      shillings the quarter of wheat. This sum in 1423, the year at which he
      begins with it, contained the same quantity of silver as sixteen shillings
      of our present money. But in 1562, the year at which he ends with it, it
      contained no more than the same nominal sum does at present.  Secondly, they have been misled by the slovenly manner in which some
      ancient statutes of assize had been sometimes transcribed by lazy copiers,
      and sometimes, perhaps, actually composed by the legislature.  The ancient statutes of assize seem to have begun always with determining
      what ought to be the price of bread and ale when the price of wheat and
      barley were at the lowest; and to have proceeded gradually to determine
      what it ought to be, according as the prices of those two sorts of grain
      should gradually rise above this lowest price. But the transcribers of
      those statutes seem frequently to have thought it sufficient to copy the
      regulation as far as the three or four first and lowest prices; saving in
      this manner their own labour, and judging, I suppose, that this was enough
      to show what proportion ought to be observed in all higher prices.  Thus, in the assize of bread and ale, of the 51st of Henry III. the price
      of bread was regulated according to the different prices of wheat, from
      one shilling to twenty shillings the quarter of the money of those times.
      But in the manuscripts from which all the different editions of the
      statutes, preceding that of Mr Ruffhead, were printed, the copiers had
      never transcribed this regulation beyond the price of twelve shillings.
      Several writers, therefore, being misled by this faulty transcription,
      very naturally conclude that the middle price, or six shillings the
      quarter, equal to about eighteen shillings of our present money, was the
      ordinary or average price of wheat at that time.  In the statute of Tumbrel and Pillory, enacted nearly about the same time,
      the price of ale is regulated according to every sixpence rise in the
      price of barley, from two shillings, to four shillings the quarter. That
      four shillings, however, was not considered as the highest price to which
      barley might frequently rise in those times, and that these prices were
      only given as an example of the proportion which ought to be observed in
      all other prices, whether higher or lower, we may infer from the last
      words of the statute: “Et sic deinceps crescetur vel diminuetur per sex
      denarios.” The expression is very slovenly, but the meaning is plain
      enough, “that the price of ale is in this manner to be increased or
      diminished according to every sixpence rise or fall in the price of
      barley.” In the composition of this statute, the legislature itself seems
      to have been as negligent as the copiers were in the transcription of the
      other.  In an ancient manuscript of the Regiam Majestatem, an old Scotch law book,
      there is a statute of assize, in which the price of bread is regulated
      according to all the different prices of wheat, from tenpence to three
      shillings the Scotch boll, equal to about half an English quarter. Three
      shillings Scotch, at the time when this assize is supposed to have been
      enacted, were equal to about nine shillings sterling of our present money.
      Mr Ruddiman seems {See his Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata Scotiae.} to
      conclude from this, that three shillings was the highest price to which
      wheat ever rose in those times, and that tenpence, a shilling, or at most
      two shillings, were the ordinary prices. Upon consulting the manuscript,
      however, it appears evidently, that all these prices are only set down as
      examples of the proportion which ought to be observed between the
      respective prices of wheat and bread. The last words of the statute are
      “reliqua judicabis secundum praescripta, habendo respectum ad pretium
      bladi.”—“You shall judge of the remaining cases, according to what
      is above written, having respect to the price of corn.”  Thirdly, they seem to have been misled too, by the very low price at which
      wheat was sometimes sold in very ancient times; and to have imagined, that
      as its lowest price was then much lower than in later times its ordinary
      price must likewise have been much lower. They might have found, however,
      that in those ancient times its highest price was fully as much above, as
      its lowest price was below any thing that had ever been known in later
      times. Thus, in 1270, Fleetwood gives us two prices of the quarter of
      wheat. The one is four pounds sixteen shillings of the money of those
      times, equal to fourteen pounds eight shillings of that of the present;
      the other is six pounds eight shillings, equal to nineteen pounds four
      shillings of our present money. No price can be found in the end of the
      fifteenth, or beginning of the sixteenth century, which approaches to the
      extravagance of these. The price of corn, though at all times liable to
      variation varies most in those turbulent and disorderly societies, in
      which the interruption of all commerce and communication hinders the
      plenty of one part of the country from relieving the scarcity of another.
      In the disorderly state of England under the Plantagenets, who governed it
      from about the middle of the twelfth till towards the end of the fifteenth
      century, one district might be in plenty, while another, at no great
      distance, by having its crop destroyed, either by some accident of the
      seasons, or by the incursion of some neighbouring baron, might be
      suffering all the horrors of a famine; and yet if the lands of some
      hostile lord were interposed between them, the one might not be able to
      give the least assistance to the other. Under the vigorous administration
      of the Tudors, who governed England during the latter part of the
      fifteenth, and through the whole of the sixteenth century, no baron was
      powerful enough to dare to disturb the public security.  The reader will find at the end of this chapter all the prices of wheat
      which have been collected by Fleetwood, from 1202 to 1597, both inclusive,
      reduced to the money of the present times, and digested, according to the
      order of time, into seven divisions of twelve years each. At the end of
      each division, too, he will find the average price of the twelve years of
      which it consists. In that long period of time, Fleetwood has been able to
      collect the prices of no more than eighty years; so that four years are
      wanting to make out the last twelve years. I have added, therefore, from
      the accounts of Eton college, the prices of 1598, 1599, 1600, and 1601. It
      is the only addition which I have made. The reader will see, that from the
      beginning of the thirteenth till after the middle of the sixteenth
      century, the average price of each twelve years grows gradually lower and
      lower; and that towards the end of the sixteenth century it begins to rise
      again. The prices, indeed, which Fleetwood has been able to collect, seem
      to have been those chiefly which were remarkable for extraordinary
      dearness or cheapness; and I do not pretend that any very certain
      conclusion can be drawn from them. So far, however, as they prove any
      thing at all, they confirm the account which I have been endeavouring to
      give. Fleetwood himself, however, seems, with most other writers, to have
      believed, that, during all this period, the value of silver, in
      consequence of its increasing abundance, was continually diminishing. The
      prices of corn, which he himself has collected, certainly do not agree
      with this opinion. They agree perfectly with that of Mr Dupré de St Maur,
      and with that which I have been endeavouring to explain. Bishop Fleetwood
      and Mr Dupré de St Maur are the two authors who seem to have collected,
      with the greatest diligence and fidelity, the prices of things in ancient
      times. It is somewhat curious that, though their opinions are so very
      different, their facts, so far as they relate to the price of corn at
      least, should coincide so very exactly.  It is not, however, so much from the low price of corn, as from that of
      some other parts of the rude produce of land, that the most judicious
      writers have inferred the great value of silver in those very ancient
      times. Corn, it has been said, being a sort of manufacture, was, in those
      rude ages, much dearer in proportion than the greater part of other
      commodities; it is meant, I suppose, than the greater part of
      unmanufactured commodities, such as cattle, poultry, game of all kinds,
      etc. That in those times of poverty and barbarism these were
      proportionably much cheaper than corn, is undoubtedly true. But this
      cheapness was not the effect of the high value of silver, but of the low
      value of those commodities. It was not because silver would in such times
      purchase or represent a greater quantity of labour, but because such
      commodities would purchase or represent a much smaller quantity than in
      times of more opulence and improvement. Silver must certainly be cheaper
      in Spanish America than in Europe; in the country where it is produced,
      than in the country to which it is brought, at the expense of a long
      carriage both by land and by sea, of a freight, and an insurance.
      One-and-twenty pence halfpenny sterling, however, we are told by Ulloa,
      was, not many years ago, at Buenos Ayres, the price of an ox chosen from a
      herd of three or four hundred. Sixteen shillings sterling, we are told by
      Mr Byron, was the price of a good horse in the capital of Chili. In a
      country naturally fertile, but of which the far greater part is altogether
      uncultivated, cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, etc. as they can be
      acquired with a very small quantity of labour, so they will purchase or
      command but a very small quantity. The low money price for which they may
      be sold, is no proof that the real value of silver is there very high, but
      that the real value of those commodities is very low.  Labour, it must always be remembered, and not any particular commodity, or
      set of commodities, is the real measure of the value both of silver and of
      all other commodities.  But in countries almost waste, or but thinly inhabited, cattle, poultry,
      game of all kinds, etc. as they are the spontaneous productions of Nature,
      so she frequently produces them in much greater quantities than the
      consumption of the inhabitants requires. In such a state of things, the
      supply commonly exceeds the demand. In different states of society, in
      different states of improvement, therefore, such commodities will
      represent, or be equivalent, to very different quantities of labour.  In every state of society, in every stage of improvement, corn is the
      production of human industry. But the average produce of every sort of
      industry is always suited, more or less exactly, to the average
      consumption; the average supply to the average demand. In every different
      stage of improvement, besides, the raising of equal quantities of corn in
      the same soil and climate, will, at an average, require nearly equal
      quantities of labour; or, what comes to the same thing, the price of
      nearly equal quantities; the continual increase of the productive powers
      of labour, in an improved state of cultivation, being more or less
      counterbalanced by the continual increasing price of cattle, the principal
      instruments of agriculture. Upon all these accounts, therefore, we may
      rest assured, that equal quantities of corn will, in every state of
      society, in every stage of improvement, more nearly represent, or be
      equivalent to, equal quantities of labour, than equal quantities of any
      other part of the rude produce of land. Corn, accordingly, it has already
      been observed, is, in all the different stages of wealth and improvement,
      a more accurate measure of value than any other commodity or set of
      commodities. In all those different stages, therefore, we can judge better
      of the real value of silver, by comparing it with corn, than by comparing
      it with any other commodity or set of commodities.  Corn, besides, or whatever else is the common and favourite vegetable food
      of the people, constitutes, in every civilized country, the principal part
      of the subsistence of the labourer. In consequence of the extension of
      agriculture, the land of every country produces a much greater quantity of
      vegetable than of animal food, and the labourer everywhere lives chiefly
      upon the wholesome food that is cheapest and most abundant. Butcher’s
      meat, except in the most thriving countries, or where labour is most
      highly rewarded, makes but an insignificant part of his subsistence;
      poultry makes a still smaller part of it, and game no part of it. In
      France, and even in Scotland, where labour is somewhat better rewarded
      than in France, the labouring poor seldom eat butcher’s meat, except upon
      holidays, and other extraordinary occasions. The money price of labour,
      therefore, depends much more upon the average money price of corn, the
      subsistence of the labourer, than upon that of butcher’s meat, or of any
      other part of the rude produce of land. The real value of gold and silver,
      therefore, the real quantity of labour which they can purchase or command,
      depends much more upon the quantity of corn which they can purchase or
      command, than upon that of butcher’s meat, or any other part of the rude
      produce of land.  Such slight observations, however, upon the prices either of corn or of
      other commodities, would not probably have misled so many intelligent
      authors, had they not been influenced at the same time by the popular
      notion, that as the quantity of silver naturally increases in every
      country with the increase of wealth, so its value diminishes as its
      quantity increases. This notion, however, seems to be altogether
      groundless.  The quantity of the precious metals may increase in any country from two
      different causes; either, first, from the increased abundance of the mines
      which supply it; or, secondly, from the increased wealth of the people,
      from the increased produce of their annual labour. The first of these
      causes is no doubt necessarily connected with the diminution of the value
      of the precious metals; but the second is not.  When more abundant mines are discovered, a greater quantity of the
      precious metals is brought to market; and the quantity of the necessaries
      and conveniencies of life for which they must be exchanged being the same
      as before, equal quantities of the metals must be exchanged for smaller
      quantities of commodities. So far, therefore, as the increase of the
      quantity of the precious metals in any country arises from the increased
      abundance of the mines, it is necessarily connected with some diminution
      of their value.  When, on the contrary, the wealth of any country increases, when the
      annual produce of its labour becomes gradually greater and greater, a
      greater quantity of coin becomes necessary in order to circulate a greater
      quantity of commodities: and the people, as they can afford it, as they
      have more commodities to give for it, will naturally purchase a greater
      and a greater quantity of plate. The quantity of their coin will increase
      from necessity; the quantity of their plate from vanity and ostentation,
      or from the same reason that the quantity of fine statues, pictures, and
      of every other luxury and curiosity, is likely to increase among them. But
      as statuaries and painters are not likely to be worse rewarded in times of
      wealth and prosperity, than in times of poverty and depression, so gold
      and silver are not likely to be worse paid for.  The price of gold and silver, when the accidental discovery of more
      abundant mines does not keep it down, as it naturally rises with the
      wealth of every country, so, whatever be the state of the mines, it is at
      all times naturally higher in a rich than in a poor country. Gold and
      silver, like all other commodities, naturally seek the market where the
      best price is given for them, and the best price is commonly given for
      every thing in the country which can best afford it. Labour, it must be
      remembered, is the ultimate price which is paid for every thing; and in
      countries where labour is equally well rewarded, the money price of labour
      will be in proportion to that of the subsistence of the labourer. But gold
      and silver will naturally exchange for a greater quantity of subsistence
      in a rich than in a poor country; in a country which abounds with
      subsistence, than in one which is but indifferently supplied with it. If
      the two countries are at a great distance, the difference may be very
      great; because, though the metals naturally fly from the worse to the
      better market, yet it may be difficult to transport them in such
      quantities as to bring their price nearly to a level in both. If the
      countries are near, the difference will be smaller, and may sometimes be
      scarce perceptible; because in this case the transportation will be easy.
      China is a much richer country than any part of Europe, and the difference
      between the price of subsistence in China and in Europe is very great.
      Rice in China is much cheaper than wheat is any where in Europe. England
      is a much richer country than Scotland, but the difference between the
      money price of corn in those two countries is much smaller, and is but
      just perceptible. In proportion to the quantity or measure, Scotch corn
      generally appears to be a good deal cheaper than English; but, in
      proportion to its quality, it is certainly somewhat dearer. Scotland
      receives almost every year very large supplies from England, and every
      commodity must commonly be somewhat dearer in the country to which it is
      brought than in that from which it comes. English corn, therefore, must be
      dearer in Scotland than in England; and yet in proportion to its quality,
      or to the quantity and goodness of the flour or meal which can be made
      from it, it cannot commonly be sold higher there than the Scotch corn
      which comes to market in competition with it.  The difference between the money price of labour in China and in Europe,
      is still greater than that between the money price of subsistence; because
      the real recompence of labour is higher in Europe than in China, the
      greater part of Europe being in an improving state, while China seems to
      be standing still. The money price of labour is lower in Scotland than in
      England, because the real recompence of labour is much lower: Scotland,
      though advancing to greater wealth, advances much more slowly than
      England. The frequency of emigration from Scotland, and the rarity of it
      from England, sufficiently prove that the demand for labour is very
      different in the two countries. The proportion between the real recompence
      of labour in different countries, it must be remembered, is naturally
      regulated, not by their actual wealth or poverty, but by their advancing,
      stationary, or declining condition.  Gold and silver, as they are naturally of the greatest value among the
      richest, so they are naturally of the least value among the poorest
      nations. Among savages, the poorest of all nations, they are scarce of any
      value.  In great towns, corn is always dearer than in remote parts of the country.
      This, however, is the effect, not of the real cheapness of silver, but of
      the real dearness of corn. It does not cost less labour to bring silver to
      the great town than to the remote parts of the country; but it costs a
      great deal more to bring corn.  In some very rich and commercial countries, such as Holland and the
      territory of Genoa, corn is dear for the same reason that it is dear in
      great towns. They do not produce enough to maintain their inhabitants.
      They are rich in the industry and skill of their artificers and
      manufacturers, in every sort of machinery which can facilitate and abridge
      labour; in shipping, and in all the other instruments and means of
      carriage and commerce: but they are poor in corn, which, as it must be
      brought to them from distant countries, must, by an addition to its price,
      pay for the carriage from those countries. It does not cost less labour to
      bring silver to Amsterdam than to Dantzic; but it costs a great deal more
      to bring corn. The real cost of silver must be nearly the same in both
      places; but that of corn must be very different. Diminish the real
      opulence either of Holland or of the territory of Genoa, while the number
      of their inhabitants remains the same; diminish their power of supplying
      themselves from distant countries; and the price of corn, instead of
      sinking with that diminution in the quantity of their silver, which must
      necessarily accompany this declension, either as its cause or as its
      effect, will rise to the price of a famine. When we are in want of
      necessaries, we must part with all superfluities, of which the value, as
      it rises in times of opulence and prosperity, so it sinks in times of
      poverty and distress. It is otherwise with necessaries. Their real price,
      the quantity of labour which they can purchase or command, rises in times
      of poverty and distress, and sinks in times of opulence and prosperity,
      which are always times of great abundance; for they could not otherwise be
      times of opulence and prosperity. Corn is a necessary, silver is only a
      superfluity.  Whatever, therefore, may have been the increase in the quantity of the
      precious metals, which, during the period between the middle of the
      fourteenth and that of the sixteenth century, arose from the increase of
      wealth and improvement, it could have no tendency to diminish their value,
      either in Great Britain, or in my other part of Europe. If those who have
      collected the prices of things in ancient times, therefore, had, during
      this period, no reason to infer the diminution of the value of silver from
      any observations which they had made upon the prices either of corn, or of
      other commodities, they had still less reason to infer it from any
      supposed increase of wealth and improvement.  Second Period.—But how various soever may have been the opinions of
      the learned concerning the progress of the value of silver during the
      first period, they are unanimous concerning it during the second.  From about 1570 to about 1640, during a period of about seventy years, the
      variation in the proportion between the value of silver and that of corn
      held a quite opposite course. Silver sunk in its real value, or would
      exchange for a smaller quantity of labour than before; and corn rose in
      its nominal price, and, instead of being commonly sold for about two
      ounces of silver the quarter, or about ten shillings of our present money,
      came to be sold for six and eight ounces of silver the quarter, or about
      thirty and forty shillings of our present money.  The discovery of the abundant mines of America seems to have been the sole
      cause of this diminution in the value of silver, in proportion to that of
      corn. It is accounted for, accordingly, in the same manner by every body;
      and there never has been any dispute, either about the fact, or about the
      cause of it. The greater part of Europe was, during this period, advancing
      in industry and improvement, and the demand for silver must consequently
      have been increasing; but the increase of the supply had, it seems, so far
      exceeded that of the demand, that the value of that metal sunk
      considerably. The discovery of the mines of America, it is to be observed,
      does not seem to have had any very sensible effect upon the prices of
      things in England till after 1570; though even the mines of Potosi had
      been discovered more than twenty years before.  From 1595 to 1620, both inclusive, the average price of the quarter of
      nine bushels of the best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, from the
      accounts of Eton college, to have been £ 2:1:6 9/13. From which sum,
      neglecting the fraction, and deducting a ninth, or 4s. 7 1/3d., the price
      of the quarter of eight bushels comes out to have been £ 1:16:10 2/3. And
      from this sum, neglecting likewise the fraction, and deducting a ninth, or
      4s. 1 1/9d., for the difference between the price of the best wheat and
      that of the middle wheat, the price of the middle wheat comes out to have
      been about £ 1:12:8 8/9, or about six ounces and one-third of an ounce of
      silver.  From 1621 to 1636, both inclusive, the average price of the same measure
      of the best wheat, at the same market, appears, from the same accounts, to
      have been £ 2:10s.; from which, making the like deductions as in the
      foregoing case, the average price of the quarter of eight bushels of
      middle wheat comes out to have been £ 1:19:6, or about seven ounces and
      two-thirds of an ounce of silver.  Third Period.—Between 1630 and 1640, or about 1636, the effect of
      the discovery of the mines of America, in reducing the value of silver,
      appears to have been completed, and the value of that metal seems never to
      have sunk lower in proportion to that of corn than it was about that time.
      It seems to have risen somewhat in the course of the present century, and
      it had probably begun to do so, even some time before the end of the last.  From 1637 to 1700, both inclusive, being the sixty-four last years of the
      last century the average price of the quarter of nine bushels of the best
      wheat, at Windsor market, appears, from the same accounts, to have been £
      2:11:0 1/3, which is only 1s. 0 1/3d. dearer than it had been during the
      sixteen years before. But, in the course of these sixty-four years, there
      happened two events, which must have produced a much greater scarcity of
      corn than what the course of the seasons would otherwise have occasioned,
      and which, therefore, without supposing any further reduction in the
      value of silver, will much more than account for this very small
      enhancement of price.  The first of these events was the civil war, which, by discouraging
      tillage and interrupting commerce, must have raised the price of corn much
      above what the course of the seasons would otherwise have occasioned. It
      must have had this effect, more or less, at all the different markets in
      the kingdom, but particularly at those in the neighbourhood of London,
      which require to be supplied from the greatest distance. In 1648,
      accordingly, the price of the best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, from
      the same accounts, to have been £ 4:5s., and, in 1649, to have been £ 4,
      the quarter of nine bushels. The excess of those two years above £ 2:10s.
      (the average price of the sixteen years preceding 1637) is £ 3:5s., which,
      divided among the sixty four last years of the last century, will alone
      very nearly account for that small enhancement of price which seems to
      have taken place in them. These, however, though the highest, are by no
      means the only high prices which seem to have been occasioned by the civil
      wars.  The second event was the bounty upon the exportation of corn, granted in
      1688. The bounty, it has been thought by many people, by encouraging
      tillage, may, in a long course of years, have occasioned a greater
      abundance, and, consequently, a greater cheapness of corn in the home
      market, than what would otherwise have taken place there. How far the
      bounty could produce this effect at any time I shall examine hereafter: I
      shall only observe at present, that between 1688 and 1700, it had not time
      to produce any such effect. During this short period, its only effect must
      have been, by encouraging the exportation of the surplus produce of every
      year, and thereby hindering the abundance of one year from compensating
      the scarcity of another, to raise the price in the home market. The
      scarcity which prevailed in England, from 1693 to 1699, both inclusive,
      though no doubt principally owing to the badness of the seasons, and,
      therefore, extending through a considerable part of Europe, must have been
      somewhat enhanced by the bounty. In 1699, accordingly, the further
      exportation of corn was prohibited for nine months.  There was a third event which occurred in the course of the same period,
      and which, though it could not occasion any scarcity of corn, nor,
      perhaps, any augmentation in the real quantity of silver which was usually
      paid for it, must necessarily have occasioned some augmentation in the
      nominal sum. This event was the great debasement of the silver coin, by
      clipping and wearing. This evil had begun in the reign of Charles II. and
      had gone on continually increasing till 1695; at which time, as we may
      learn from Mr Lowndes, the current silver coin was, at an average, near
      five-and-twenty per cent. below its standard value. But the nominal sum
      which constitutes the market price of every commodity is necessarily
      regulated, not so much by the quantity of silver, which, according to the
      standard, ought to be contained in it, as by that which, it is found by
      experience, actually is contained in it. This nominal sum, therefore, is
      necessarily higher when the coin is much debased by clipping and wearing,
      than when near to its standard value.  In the course of the present century, the silver coin has not at any time
      been more below its standard weight than it is at present. But though very
      much defaced, its value has been kept up by that of the gold coin, for
      which it is exchanged. For though, before the late recoinage, the gold
      coin was a good deal defaced too, it was less so than the silver. In 1695,
      on the contrary, the value of the silver coin was not kept up by the gold
      coin; a guinea then commonly exchanging for thirty shillings of the worn
      and clipt silver. Before the late recoinage of the gold, the price of
      silver bullion was seldom higher than five shillings and sevenpence an
      ounce, which is but fivepence above the mint price. But in 1695, the
      common price of silver bullion was six shillings and fivepence an ounce,
      {Lowndes’s Essay on the Silver Coin, 68.} which is fifteen pence above the
      mint price. Even before the late recoinage of the gold, therefore, the
      coin, gold and silver together, when compared with silver bullion, was not
      supposed to be more than eight per cent. below its standard value, In
      1695, on the contrary, it had been supposed to be near five-and-twenty per
      cent. below that value. But in the beginning of the present century, that
      is, immediately after the great recoinage in King William’s time, the
      greater part of the current silver coin must have been still nearer to its
      standard weight than it is at present. In the course of the present
      century, too, there has been no great public calamity, such as a civil
      war, which could either discourage tillage, or interrupt the interior
      commerce of the country. And though the bounty which has taken place
      through the greater part of this century, must always raise the price of
      corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the actual state of
      tillage; yet, as in the course of this century, the bounty has had full
      time to produce all the good effects commonly imputed to it to encourage
      tillage, and thereby to increase the quantity of corn in the home market,
      it may, upon the principles of a system which I shall explain and examine
      hereafter, be supposed to have done something to lower the price of that
      commodity the one way, as well as to raise it the other. It is by many
      people supposed to have done more. In the sixty-four years of the present
      century, accordingly, the average price of the quarter of nine bushels of
      the best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, by the accounts of Eton
      college, to have been £ 2:0:6 10/32, which is about ten shillings and
      sixpence, or more than five-and-twenty percent. cheaper than it had been
      during the sixty-four last years of the last century; and about nine
      shillings and sixpence cheaper than it had been during the sixteen years
      preceding 1636, when the discovery of the abundant mines of America may be
      supposed to have produced its full effect; and about one shilling cheaper
      than it had been in the twenty-six years preceding 1620, before that
      discovery can well be supposed to have produced its full effect. According
      to this account, the average price of middle wheat, during these
      sixty-four first years of the present century, comes out to have been
      about thirty-two shillings the quarter of eight bushels.  The value of silver, therefore, seems to have risen somewhat in proportion
      to that of corn during the course of the present century, and it had
      probably begun to do so even some time before the end of the last.  In 1687, the price of the quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat, at
      Windsor market, was £ 1:5:2, the lowest price at which it had ever been
      from 1595.  In 1688, Mr Gregory King, a man famous for his knowledge in matters of
      this kind, estimated the average price of wheat, in years of moderate
      plenty, to be to the grower 3s. 6d. the bushel, or eight-and-twenty
      shillings the quarter. The grower’s price I understand to be the same with
      what is sometimes called the contract price, or the price at which a
      farmer contracts for a certain number of years to deliver a certain
      quantity of corn to a dealer. As a contract of this kind saves the farmer
      the expense and trouble of marketing, the contract price is generally
      lower than what is supposed to be the average market price. Mr King had
      judged eight-and-twenty shillings the quarter to be at that time the
      ordinary contract price in years of moderate plenty. Before the scarcity
      occasioned by the late extraordinary course of bad seasons, it was, I have
      been assured, the ordinary contract price in all common years.  In 1688 was granted the parliamentary bounty upon the exportation of corn.
      The country gentlemen, who then composed a still greater proportion of the
      legislature than they do at present, had felt that the money price of corn
      was falling. The bounty was an expedient to raise it artificially to the
      high price at which it had frequently been sold in the times of Charles I.
      and II. It was to take place, therefore, till wheat was so high as
      fortyeight shillings the quarter; that is, twenty shillings, or 5-7ths
      dearer than Mr King had, in that very year, estimated the grower’s price
      to be in times of moderate plenty. If his calculations deserve any part of
      the reputation which they have obtained very universally, eight-and-forty
      shillings the quarter was a price which, without some such expedient as
      the bounty, could not at that time be expected, except in years of
      extraordinary scarcity. But the government of King William was not then
      fully settled. It was in no condition to refuse anything to the country
      gentlemen, from whom it was, at that very time, soliciting the first
      establishment of the annual land-tax.  The value of silver, therefore, in proportion to that of corn, had
      probably risen somewhat before the end of the last century; and it seems
      to have continued to do so during the course of the greater part of the
      present, though the necessary operation of the bounty must have hindered
      that rise from being so sensible as it otherwise would have been in the
      actual state of tillage.  In plentiful years, the bounty, by occasioning an extraordinary
      exportation, necessarily raises the price of corn above what it otherwise
      would be in those years. To encourage tillage, by keeping up the price of
      corn, even in the most plentiful years, was the avowed end of the
      institution.  In years of great scarcity, indeed, the bounty has generally been
      suspended. It must, however, have had some effect upon the prices of many
      of those years. By the extraordinary exportation which it occasions in
      years of plenty, it must frequently hinder the plenty of one year from
      compensating the scarcity of another.  Both in years of plenty and in years of scarcity, therefore, the bounty
      raises the price of corn above what it naturally would be in the actual
      state of tillage. If during the sixty-four first years of the present
      century, therefore, the average price has been lower than during the
      sixty-four last years of the last century, it must, in the same state of
      tillage, have been much more so, had it not been for this operation of the
      bounty.  But, without the bounty, it may be said the state of tillage would not
      have been the same. What may have been the effects of this institution
      upon the agriculture of the country, I shall endeavour to explain
      hereafter, when I come to treat particularly of bounties. I shall only
      observe at present, that this rise in the value of silver, in proportion
      to that of corn, has not been peculiar to England. It has been observed to
      have taken place in France during the same period, and nearly in the same
      proportion, too, by three very faithful, diligent, and laborious
      collectors of the prices of corn, Mr Dupré de St Maur, Mr Messance, and
      the author of the Essay on the Police of Grain. But in France, till 1764,
      the exportation of grain was by law prohibited; and it is somewhat
      difficult to suppose, that nearly the same diminution of price which took
      place in one country, notwithstanding this prohibition, should, in
      another, be owing to the extraordinary encouragement given to exportation.  It would be more proper, perhaps, to consider this variation in the
      average money price of corn as the effect rather of some gradual rise in
      the real value of silver in the European market, than of any fall in the
      real average value of corn. Corn, it has already been observed, is, at
      distant periods of time, a more accurate measure of value than either
      silver or, perhaps, any other commodity. When, after the discovery of the
      abundant mines of America, corn rose to three and four times its former
      money price, this change was universally ascribed, not to any rise in the
      real value of corn, but to a fall in the real value of silver. If, during
      the sixty-four first years of the present century, therefore, the average
      money price of corn has fallen somewhat below what it had been during the
      greater part of the last century, we should, in the same manner, impute
      this change, not to any fall in the real value of corn, but to some rise
      in the real value of silver in the European market.  The high price of corn during these ten or twelve years past, indeed, has
      occasioned a suspicion that the real value of silver still continues to
      fall in the European market. This high price of corn, however, seems
      evidently to have been the effect of the extraordinary unfavourableness of
      the seasons, and ought, therefore, to be regarded, not as a permanent, but
      as a transitory and occasional event. The seasons, for these ten or twelve
      years past, have been unfavourable through the greater part of Europe; and
      the disorders of Poland have very much increased the scarcity in all those
      countries, which, in dear years, used to be supplied from that market. So
      long a course of bad seasons, though not a very common event, is by no
      means a singular one; and whoever has inquired much into the history of
      the prices of corn in former times, will be at no loss to recollect
      several other examples of the same kind. Ten years of extraordinary
      scarcity, besides, are not more wonderful than ten years of extraordinary
      plenty. The low price of corn, from 1741 to 1750, both inclusive, may very
      well be set in opposition to its high price during these last eight or ten
      years. From 1741 to 1750, the average price of the quarter of nine bushels
      of the best wheat, at Windsor market, it appears from the accounts of Eton
      college, was only £ 1:13:9 4/5, which is nearly 6s.3d. below the average
      price of the sixty-four first years of the present century. The average
      price of the quarter of eight bushels of middle wheat comes out, according
      to this account, to have been, during these ten years, only £ 1:6:8.  Between 1741 and 1750, however, the bounty must have hindered the price of
      corn from falling so low in the home market as it naturally would have
      done. During these ten years, the quantity of all sorts of grain exported,
      it appears from the custom-house books, amounted to no less than 8,029,156
      quarters, one bushel. The bounty paid for this amounted to £
      1,514,962:17:4 1/2. In 1749, accordingly, Mr Pelham, at that time prime
      minister, observed to the house of commons, that, for the three years
      preceding, a very extraordinary sum had been paid as bounty for the
      exportation of corn. He had good reason to make this observation, and in
      the following year he might have had still better. In that single year,
      the bounty paid amounted to no less than £ 324,176:10:6. {See Tracts on
      the Corn Trade, Tract 3,} It is unnecessary to observe how much this
      forced exportation must have raised the price of corn above what it
      otherwise would have been in the home market.  At the end of the accounts annexed to this chapter the reader will find
      the particular account of those ten years separated from the rest. He will
      find there, too, the particular account of the preceding ten years, of
      which the average is likewise below, though not so much below, the general
      average of the sixty-four first years of the century. The year 1740,
      however, was a year of extraordinary scarcity. These twenty years
      preceding 1750 may very well be set in opposition to the twenty preceding
      1770. As the former were a good deal below the general average of the
      century, notwithstanding the intervention of one or two dear years; so the
      latter have been a good deal above it, notwithstanding the intervention of
      one or two cheap ones, of 1759, for example. If the former have not been
      as much below the general average as the latter have been above it, we
      ought probably to impute it to the bounty. The change has evidently been
      too sudden to be ascribed to any change in the value of silver, which is
      always slow and gradual. The suddenness of the effect can be accounted for
      only by a cause which can operate suddenly, the accidental variations of
      the seasons.  The money price of labour in Great Britain has, indeed, risen during the
      course of the present century. This, however, seems to be the effect, not
      so much of any diminution in the value of silver in the European market,
      as of an increase in the demand for labour in Great Britain, arising from
      the great, and almost universal prosperity of the country. In France, a
      country not altogether so prosperous, the money price of labour has, since
      the middle of the last century, been observed to sink gradually with the
      average money price of corn. Both in the last century and in the present,
      the day wages of common labour are there said to have been pretty
      uniformly about the twentieth part of the average price of the septier of
      wheat; a measure which contains a little more than four Winchester
      bushels. In Great Britain, the real recompence of labour, it has already
      been shewn, the real quantities of the necessaries and conveniencies of
      life which are given to the labourer, has increased considerably during
      the course of the present century. The rise in its money price seems to
      have been the effect, not of any diminution of the value of silver in the
      general market of Europe, but of a rise in the real price of labour, in
      the particular market of Great Britain, owing to the peculiarly happy
      circumstances of the country.  For some time after the first discovery of America, silver would continue
      to sell at its former, or not much below its former price. The profits of
      mining would for some time be very great, and much above their natural
      rate. Those who imported that metal into Europe, however, would soon find
      that the whole annual importation could not be disposed of at this high
      price. Silver would gradually exchange for a smaller and a smaller
      quantity of goods. Its price would sink gradually lower and lower, till it
      fell to its natural price; or to what was just sufficient to pay,
      according to their natural rates, the wages of the labour, the profits of
      the stock, and the rent of the land, which must be paid in order to bring
      it from the mine to the market. In the greater part of the silver mines of
      Peru, the tax of the king of Spain, amounting to a tenth of the gross
      produce, eats up, it has already been observed, the whole rent of the
      land. This tax was originally a half; it soon afterwards fell to a third,
      then to a fifth, and at last to a tenth, at which late it still continues.
      In the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, this, it seems, is all
      that remains, after replacing the stock of the undertaker of the work,
      together with its ordinary profits; and it seems to be universally
      acknowledged that these profits, which were once very high, are now as low
      as they can well be, consistently with carrying on the works.  The tax of the king of Spain was reduced to a fifth of the registered
      silver in 1504 {Solorzano, vol, ii.}, one-and-forty years before 1545, the
      date of the discovery of the mines of Potosi. In the course of ninety
      years, or before 1636, these mines, the most fertile in all America, had
      time sufficient to produce their full effect, or to reduce the value of
      silver in the European market as low as it could well fall, while it
      continued to pay this tax to the king of Spain. Ninety years is time
      sufficient to reduce any commodity, of which there is no monopoly, to its
      natural price, or to the lowest price at which, while it pays a particular
      tax, it can continue to be sold for any considerable time together.  The price of silver in the European market might, perhaps, have fallen
      still lower, and it might have become necessary either to reduce the tax
      upon it, not only to one-tenth, as in 1736, but to one twentieth, in the
      same manner as that upon gold, or to give up working the greater part of
      the American mines which are now wrought. The gradual increase of the
      demand for silver, or the gradual enlargement of the market for the
      produce of the silver mines of America, is probably the cause which has
      prevented this from happening, and which has not only kept up the value of
      silver in the European market, but has perhaps even raised it somewhat
      higher than it was about the middle of the last century.  Since the first discovery of America, the market for the produce of its
      silver mines has been growing gradually more and more extensive.  First, the market of Europe has become gradually more and more extensive.
      Since the discovery of America, the greater part of Europe has been much
      improved. England, Holland, France, and Germany; even Sweden, Denmark, and
      Russia, have all advanced considerably, both in agriculture and in
      manufactures. Italy seems not to have gone backwards. The fall of Italy
      preceded the conquest of Peru. Since that time it seems rather to have
      recovered a little. Spain and Portugal, indeed, are supposed to have gone
      backwards. Portugal, however, is but a very small part of Europe, and the
      declension of Spain is not, perhaps, so great as is commonly imagined. In
      the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain was a very poor country,
      even in comparison with France, which has been so much improved since that
      time. It was the well known remark of the emperor Charles V. who had
      travelled so frequently through both countries, that every thing abounded
      in France, but that every thing was wanting in Spain. The increasing
      produce of the agriculture and manufactures of Europe must necessarily
      have required a gradual increase in the quantity of silver coin to
      circulate it; and the increasing number of wealthy individuals must have
      required the like increase in the quantity of their plate and other
      ornaments of silver.  Secondly, America is itself a new market, for the produce of its own
      silver mines; and as its advances in agriculture, industry, and
      population, are much more rapid than those of the most thriving countries
      in Europe, its demand must increase much more rapidly. The English
      colonies are altogether a new market, which, partly for coin, and partly
      for plate, requires a continual augmenting supply of silver through a
      great continent where there never was any demand before. The greater part,
      too, of the Spanish and Portuguese colonies, are altogether new markets.
      New Granada, the Yucatan, Paraguay, and the Brazils, were, before
      discovered by the Europeans, inhabited by savage nations, who had neither
      arts nor agriculture. A considerable degree of both has now been
      introduced into all of them. Even Mexico and Peru, though they cannot be
      considered as altogether new markets, are certainly much more extensive
      ones than they ever were before. After all the wonderful tales which have
      been published concerning the splendid state of those countries in ancient
      times, whoever reads, with any degree of sober judgment, the history of
      their first discovery and conquest, will evidently discern that, in arts,
      agriculture, and commerce, their inhabitants were much more ignorant than
      the Tartars of the Ukraine are at present. Even the Peruvians, the more
      civilized nation of the two, though they made use of gold and silver as
      ornaments, had no coined money of any kind. Their whole commerce was
      carried on by barter, and there was accordingly scarce any division of
      labour among them. Those who cultivated the ground, were obliged to build
      their own houses, to make their own household furniture, their own
      clothes, shoes, and instruments of agriculture. The few artificers among
      them are said to have been all maintained by the sovereign, the nobles,
      and the priests, and were probably their servants or slaves. All the
      ancient arts of Mexico and Peru have never furnished one single
      manufacture to Europe. The Spanish armies, though they scarce ever
      exceeded five hundred men, and frequently did not amount to half that
      number, found almost everywhere great difficulty in procuring subsistence.
      The famines which they are said to have occasioned almost wherever they
      went, in countries, too, which at the same time are represented as very
      populous and well cultivated, sufficiently demonstrate that the story of
      this populousness and high cultivation is in a great measure fabulous. The
      Spanish colonies are under a government in many respects less favourable
      to agriculture, improvement, and population, than that of the English
      colonies. They seem, however, to be advancing in all those much more
      rapidly than any country in Europe. In a fertile soil and happy climate,
      the great abundance and cheapness of land, a circumstance common to all
      new colonies, is, it seems, so great an advantage, as to compensate many
      defects in civil government. Frezier, who visited Peru in 1713, represents
      Lima as containing between twenty-five and twenty-eight thousand
      inhabitants. Ulloa, who resided in the same country between 1740 and 1746,
      represents it as containing more than fifty thousand. The difference in
      their accounts of the populousness of several other principal towns of
      Chili and Peru is nearly the same; and as there seems to be no reason to
      doubt of the good information of either, it marks an increase which is
      scarce inferior to that of the English colonies. America, therefore, is a
      new market for the produce of its own silver mines, of which the demand
      must increase much more rapidly than that of the most thriving country in
      Europe.  Thirdly, the East Indies is another market for the produce of the silver
      mines of America, and a market which, from the time of the first discovery
      of those mines, has been continually taking off a greater and a greater
      quantity of silver. Since that time, the direct trade between America and
      the East Indies, which is carried on by means of the Acapulco ships, has
      been continually augmenting, and the indirect intercourse by the way of
      Europe has been augmenting in a still greater proportion. During the
      sixteenth century, the Portuguese were the only European nation who
      carried on any regular trade to the East Indies. In the last years of that
      century, the Dutch began to encroach upon this monopoly, and in a few
      years expelled them from their principal settlements in India. During the
      greater part of the last century, those two nations divided the most
      considerable part of the East India trade between them; the trade of the
      Dutch continually augmenting in a still greater proportion than that of
      the Portuguese declined. The English and French carried on some trade with
      India in the last century, but it has been greatly augmented in the course
      of the present. The East India trade of the Swedes and Danes began in the
      course of the present century. Even the Muscovites now trade regularly
      with China, by a sort of caravans which go over land through Siberia and
      Tartary to Pekin. The East India trade of all these nations, if we except
      that of the French, which the last war had well nigh annihilated, has been
      almost continually augmenting. The increasing consumptions of East India
      goods in Europe is, it seems, so great, as to afford a gradual increase of
      employment to them all. Tea, for example, was a drug very little used in
      Europe, before the middle of the last century. At present, the value of
      the tea annually imported by the English East India company, for the use
      of their own countrymen, amounts to more than a million and a half a year;
      and even this is not enough; a great deal more being constantly smuggled
      into the country from the ports of Holland, from Gottenburgh in Sweden,
      and from the coast of France, too, as long as the French East India
      company was in prosperity. The consumption of the porcelain of China, of
      the spiceries of the Moluccas, of the piece goods of Bengal, and of
      innumerable other articles, has increased very nearly in a like
      proportion. The tonnage, accordingly, of all the European shipping
      employed in the East India trade, at any one time during the last century,
      was not, perhaps, much greater than that of the English East India company
      before the late reduction of their shipping.  But in the East Indies, particularly in China and Indostan, the value of
      the precious metals, when the Europeans first began to trade to those
      countries, was much higher than in Europe; and it still continues to be
      so. In rice countries, which generally yield two, sometimes three crops in
      the year, each of them more plentiful than any common crop of corn, the
      abundance of food must be much greater than in any corn country of equal
      extent. Such countries are accordingly much more populous. In them, too,
      the rich, having a greater superabundance of food to dispose of beyond
      what they themselves can consume, have the means of purchasing a much
      greater quantity of the labour of other people. The retinue of a grandee
      in China or Indostan accordingly is, by all accounts, much more numerous
      and splendid than that of the richest subjects in Europe. The same
      superabundance of food, of which they have the disposal, enables them to
      give a greater quantity of it for all those singular and rare productions
      which nature furnishes but in very small quantities; such as the precious
      metals and the precious stones, the great objects of the competition of
      the rich. Though the mines, therefore, which supplied the Indian market,
      had been as abundant as those which supplied the European, such
      commodities would naturally exchange for a greater quantity of food in
      India than in Europe. But the mines which supplied the Indian market with
      the precious metals seem to have been a good deal less abundant, and those
      which supplied it with the precious stones a good deal more so, than the
      mines which supplied the European. The precious metals, therefore, would
      naturally exchange in India for a somewhat greater quantity of the
      precious stones, and for a much greater quantity of food than in Europe.
      The money price of diamonds, the greatest of all superfluities, would be
      somewhat lower, and that of food, the first of all necessaries, a great
      deal lower in the one country than in the other. But the real price of
      labour, the real quantity of the necessaries of life which is given to the
      labourer, it has already been observed, is lower both in China and
      Indostan, the two great markets of India, than it is through the greater
      part of Europe. The wages of the labourer will there purchase a smaller
      quantity of food: and as the money price of food is much lower in India
      than in Europe, the money price of labour is there lower upon a double
      account; upon account both of the small quantity of food which it will
      purchase, and of the low price of that food. But in countries of equal art
      and industry, the money price of the greater part of manufactures will be
      in proportion to the money price of labour; and in manufacturing art and
      industry, China and Indostan, though inferior, seem not to be much
      inferior to any part of Europe. The money price of the greater part of
      manufactures, therefore, will naturally be much lower in those great
      empires than it is anywhere in Europe. Through the greater part of Europe,
      too, the expense of land-carriage increases very much both the real and
      nominal price of most manufactures. It costs more labour, and therefore
      more money, to bring first the materials, and afterwards the complete
      manufacture to market. In China and Indostan, the extent and variety of
      inland navigations save the greater part of this labour, and consequently
      of this money, and thereby reduce still lower both the real and the
      nominal price of the greater part of their manufactures. Upon all these
      accounts, the precious metals are a commodity which it always has been,
      and still continues to be, extremely advantageous to carry from Europe to
      India. There is scarce any commodity which brings a better price there; or
      which, in proportion to the quantity of labour and commodities which it
      costs in Europe, will purchase or command a greater quantity of labour and
      commodities in India. It is more advantageous, too, to carry silver
      thither than gold; because in China, and the greater part of the other
      markets of India, the proportion between fine silver and fine gold is but
      as ten, or at most as twelve to one; whereas in Europe it is as fourteen
      or fifteen to one. In China, and the greater part of the other markets of
      India, ten, or at most twelve ounces of silver, will purchase an ounce of
      gold; in Europe, it requires from fourteen to fifteen ounces. In the
      cargoes, therefore, of the greater part of European ships which sail to
      India, silver has generally been one of the most valuable articles. It is
      the most valuable article in the Acapulco ships which sail to Manilla. The
      silver of the new continent seems, in this manner, to be one of the
      principal commodities by which the commerce between the two extremities of
      the old one is carried on; and it is by means of it, in a great measure,
      that those distant parts of the world are connected with one another.  In order to supply so very widely extended a market, the quantity of
      silver annually brought from the mines must not only be sufficient to
      support that continued increase, both of coin and of plate, which is
      required in all thriving countries; but to repair that continual waste and
      consumption of silver which takes place in all countries where that metal
      is used.  The continual consumption of the precious metals in coin by wearing, and
      in plate both by wearing and cleaning, is very sensible; and in
      commodities of which the use is so very widely extended, would alone
      require a very great annual supply. The consumption of those metals in
      some particular manufactures, though it may not perhaps be greater upon
      the whole than this gradual consumption, is, however, much more sensible,
      as it is much more rapid. In the manufactures of Birmingham alone, the
      quantity of gold and silver annually employed in gilding and plating, and
      thereby disqualified from ever afterwards appearing in the shape of those
      metals, is said to amount to more than fifty thousand pounds sterling. We
      may from thence form some notion how great must be the annual consumption
      in all the different parts of the world, either in manufactures of the
      same kind with those of Birmingham, or in laces, embroideries, gold and
      silver stuffs, the gilding of books, furniture, etc. A considerable
      quantity, too, must be annually lost in transporting those metals from one
      place to another both by sea and by land. In the greater part of the
      governments of Asia, besides, the almost universal custom of concealing
      treasures in the bowels of the earth, of which the knowledge frequently
      dies with the person who makes the concealment, must occasion the loss of
      a still greater quantity.  The quantity of gold and silver imported at both Cadiz and Lisbon
      (including not only what comes under register, but what may be supposed to
      be smuggled) amounts, according to the best accounts, to about six
      millions sterling a-year.  According to Mr Meggens {Postscript to the Universal Merchant p. 15 and
      16. This postscript was not printed till 1756, three years after the
      publication of the book, which has never had a second edition. The
      postscript is, therefore, to be found in few copies; it corrects several
      errors in the book.}, the annual importation of the precious metals into
      Spain, at an average of six years, viz. from 1748 to 1753, both inclusive,
      and into Portugal, at an average of seven years, viz. from 1747 to 1753,
      both inclusive, amounted in silver to 1,101,107 pounds weight, and in gold
      to 49,940 pounds weight. The silver, at sixty two shillings the pound
      troy, amounts to £ 3,413,431:10s. sterling. The gold, at forty-four
      guineas and a half the pound troy, amounts to £ 2,333,446:14s. sterling.
      Both together amount to £ 5,746,878:4s. sterling. The account of what was
      imported under register, he assures us, is exact. He gives us the detail
      of the particular places from which the gold and silver were brought, and
      of the particular quantity of each metal, which, according to the
      register, each of them afforded. He makes an allowance, too, for the
      quantity of each metal which, he supposes, may have been smuggled. The
      great experience of this judicious merchant renders his opinion of
      considerable weight.  According to the eloquent, and sometimes well-informed, author of the
      Philosophical and Political History of the Establishment of the Europeans
      in the two Indies, the annual importation of registered gold and silver
      into Spain, at an average of eleven years, viz. from 1754 to 1764, both
      inclusive, amounted to 13,984,185 3/5 piastres of ten reals. On account of
      what may have been smuggled, however, the whole annual importation, he
      supposes, may have amounted to seventeen millions of piastres, which, at
      4s. 6d. the piastre, is equal to £ 3,825,000 sterling. He gives the
      detail, too, of the particular places from which the gold and silver were
      brought, and of the particular quantities of each metal, which according
      to the register, each of them afforded. He informs us, too, that if we
      were to judge of the quantity of gold annually imported from the Brazils
      to Lisbon, by the amount of the tax paid to the king of Portugal, which it
      seems, is one-fifth of the standard metal, we might value it at eighteen
      millions of cruzadoes, or forty-five millions of French livres, equal to
      about twenty millions sterling. On account of what may have been smuggled,
      however, we may safely, he says, add to this sum an eighth more, or £
      250,000 sterling, so that the whole will amount to £ 2,250,000 sterling.
      According to this account, therefore, the whole annual importation of the
      precious metals into both Spain and Portugal, mounts to about £ 6,075,000
      sterling.  Several other very well authenticated, though manuscript accounts, I have
      been assured, agree in making this whole annual importation amount, at an
      average, to about six millions sterling; sometimes a little more,
      sometimes a little less.  The annual importation of the precious metals into Cadiz and Lisbon,
      indeed, is not equal to the whole annual produce of the mines of America.
      Some part is sent annually by the Acapulco ships to Manilla; some part is
      employed in a contraband trade, which the Spanish colonies carry on with
      those of other European nations; and some part, no doubt, remains in the
      country. The mines of America, besides, are by no means the only gold and
      silver mines in the world. They, are, however, by far the most abundant.
      The produce of all the other mines which are known is insignificant, it is
      acknowledged, in comparison with theirs; and the far greater part of
      their produce, it is likewise acknowledged, is annually imported into
      Cadiz and Lisbon. But the consumption of Birmingham alone, at the rate of
      fifty thousand pounds a-year, is equal to the hundred-and-twentieth part
      of this annual importation, at the rate of six millions a-year. The whole
      annual consumption of gold and silver, therefore, in all the different
      countries of the world where those metals are used, may, perhaps, be
      nearly equal to the whole annual produce. The remainder may be no more
      than sufficient to supply the increasing demand of all thriving countries.
      It may even have fallen so far short of this demand, as somewhat to raise
      the price of those metals in the European market.  The quantity of brass and iron annually brought from the mine to the
      market, is out of all proportion greater than that of gold and silver. We
      do not, however, upon this account, imagine that those coarse metals are
      likely to multiply beyond the demand, or to become gradually cheaper and
      cheaper. Why should we imagine that the precious metals are likely to do
      so? The coarse metals, indeed, though harder, are put to much harder uses,
      and, as they are of less value, less care is employed in their
      preservation. The precious metals, however, are not necessarily immortal
      any more than they, but are liable, too, to be lost, wasted, and consumed,
      in a great variety of ways.  The price of all metals, though liable to slow and gradual variations,
      varies less from year to year than that of almost any other part of the
      rude produce of land: and the price of the precious metals is even less
      liable to sudden variations than that of the coarse ones. The durableness
      of metals is the foundation of this extraordinary steadiness of price. The
      corn which was brought to market last year will be all, or almost all,
      consumed, long before the end of this year. But some part of the iron
      which was brought from the mine two or three hundred years ago, may be
      still in use, and, perhaps, some part of the gold which was brought from
      it two or three thousand years ago. The different masses of corn, which,
      in different years, must supply the consumption of the world, will always
      be nearly in proportion to the respective produce of those different
      years. But the proportion between the different masses of iron which may
      be in use in two different years, will be very little affected by any
      accidental difference in the produce of the iron mines of those two years;
      and the proportion between the masses of gold will be still less affected
      by any such difference in the produce of the gold mines. Though the
      produce of the greater part of metallic mines, therefore, varies, perhaps,
      still more from year to year than that of the greater part of corn fields,
      those variations have not the same effect upon the price of the one
      species of commodities as upon that of the other.   Variations in the Proportion between the respective Values of Gold and
      Silver.   Before the discovery of the mines of America, the value of fine gold to
      fine silver was regulated in the different mines of Europe, between the
      proportions of one to ten and one to twelve; that is, an ounce of fine
      gold was supposed to be worth from ten to twelve ounces of fine silver.
      About the middle of the last century, it came to be regulated, between the
      proportions of one to fourteen and one to fifteen; that is, an ounce of
      fine gold came to be supposed worth between fourteen and fifteen ounces of
      fine silver. Gold rose in its nominal value, or in the quantity of silver
      which was given for it. Both metals sunk in their real value, or in the
      quantity of labour which they could purchase; but silver sunk more than
      gold. Though both the gold and silver mines of America exceeded in
      fertility all those which had ever been known before, the fertility of the
      silver mines had, it seems, been proportionally still greater than that of
      the gold ones.  The great quantities of silver carried annually from Europe to India,
      have, in some of the English settlements, gradually reduced the value of
      that metal in proportion to gold. In the mint of Calcutta, an ounce of
      fine gold is supposed to be worth fifteen ounces of fine silver, in the
      same manner as in Europe. It is in the mint, perhaps, rated too high for
      the value which it bears in the market of Bengal. In China, the proportion
      of gold to silver still continues as one to ten, or one to twelve. In
      Japan, it is said to be as one to eight.  The proportion between the quantities of gold and silver annually imported
      into Europe, according to Mr Meggens’ account, is as one to twenty-two
      nearly; that is, for one ounce of gold there are imported a little more
      than twenty-two ounces of silver. The great quantity of silver sent
      annually to the East Indies reduces, he supposes, the quantities of those
      metals which remain in Europe to the proportion of one to fourteen or
      fifteen, the proportion of their values. The proportion between their
      values, he seems to think, must necessarily be the same as that between
      their quantities, and would therefore be as one to twenty-two, were it not
      for this greater exportation of silver.  But the ordinary proportion between the respective values of two
      commodities is not necessarily the same as that between the quantities of
      them which are commonly in the market. The price of an ox, reckoned at ten
      guineas, is about three score times the price of a lamb, reckoned at 3s.
      6d. It would be absurd, however, to infer from thence, that there are
      commonly in the market three score lambs for one ox; and it would be just
      as absurd to infer, because an ounce of gold will commonly purchase from
      fourteen or fifteen ounces of silver, that there are commonly in the
      market only fourteen or fifteen ounces of silver for one ounce of gold.  The quantity of silver commonly in the market, it is probable, is much
      greater in proportion to that of gold, than the value of a certain
      quantity of gold is to that of an equal quantity of silver. The whole
      quantity of a cheap commodity brought to market is commonly not only
      greater, but of greater value, than the whole quantity of a dear one. The
      whole quantity of bread annually brought to market, is not only greater,
      but of greater value, than the whole quantity of butcher’s meat; the whole
      quantity of butcher’s meat, than the whole quantity of poultry; and the
      whole quantity of poultry, than the whole quantity of wild fowl. There are
      so many more purchasers for the cheap than for the dear commodity, that,
      not only a greater quantity of it, but a greater value can commonly be
      disposed of. The whole quantity, therefore, of the cheap commodity, must
      commonly be greater in proportion to the whole quantity of the dear one,
      than the value of a certain quantity of the dear one, is to the value of
      an equal quantity of the cheap one. When we compare the precious metals
      with one another, silver is a cheap, and gold a dear commodity. We ought
      naturally to expect, therefore, that there should always be in the market,
      not only a greater quantity, but a greater value of silver than of gold.
      Let any man, who has a little of both, compare his own silver with his
      gold plate, and he will probably find, that not only the quantity, but the
      value of the former, greatly exceeds that of the latter. Many people,
      besides, have a good deal of silver who have no gold plate, which, even
      with those who have it, is generally confined to watch-cases, snuff-boxes,
      and such like trinkets, of which the whole amount is seldom of great
      value. In the British coin, indeed, the value of the gold preponderates
      greatly, but it is not so in that of all countries. In the coin of some
      countries, the value of the two metals is nearly equal. In the Scotch
      coin, before the union with England, the gold preponderated very little,
      though it did somewhat {See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata,
      etc. Scotiae.}, as it appears by the accounts of the mint. In the coin of
      many countries the silver preponderates. In France, the largest sums are
      commonly paid in that metal, and it is there difficult to get more gold
      than what is necessary to carry about in your pocket. The superior value,
      however, of the silver plate above that of the gold, which takes place in
      all countries, will much more than compensate the preponderancy of the
      gold coin above the silver, which takes place only in some countries.  Though, in one sense of the word, silver always has been, and probably
      always will be, much cheaper than gold; yet, in another sense, gold may
      perhaps, in the present state of the Spanish market, be said to be
      somewhat cheaper than silver. A commodity may be said to be dear or cheap
      not only according to the absolute greatness or smallness of its usual
      price, but according as that price is more or less above the lowest for
      which it is possible to bring it to market for any considerable time
      together. This lowest price is that which barely replaces, with a moderate
      profit, the stock which must be employed in bringing the commodity
      thither. It is the price which affords nothing to the landlord, of which
      rent makes not any component part, but which resolves itself altogether
      into wages and profit. But, in the present state of the Spanish market,
      gold is certainly somewhat nearer to this lowest price than silver. The
      tax of the king of Spain upon gold is only one-twentieth part of the
      standard metal, or five per cent.; whereas his tax upon silver amounts to
      one-tenth part of it, or to ten per cent. In these taxes, too, it has
      already been observed, consists the whole rent of the greater part of the
      gold and silver mines of Spanish America; and that upon gold is still
      worse paid than that upon silver. The profits of the undertakers of gold
      mines, too, as they more rarely make a fortune, must, in general, be still
      more moderate than those of the undertakers of silver mines. The price of
      Spanish gold, therefore, as it affords both less rent and less profit,
      must, in the Spanish market, be somewhat nearer to the lowest price for
      which it is possible to bring it thither, than the price of Spanish
      silver. When all expenses are computed, the whole quantity of the one
      metal, it would seem, cannot, in the Spanish market, be disposed of so
      advantageously as the whole quantity of the other. The tax, indeed, of the
      king of Portugal upon the gold of the Brazils, is the same with the
      ancient tax of the king of Spain upon the silver of Mexico and Peru; or
      one-fifth part of the standard metal. It may therefore be uncertain,
      whether, to the general market of Europe, the whole mass of American gold
      comes at a price nearer to the lowest for which it is possible to bring it
      thither, than the whole mass of American silver.  The price of diamonds and other precious stones may, perhaps, be still
      nearer to the lowest price at which it is possible to bring them to
      market, than even the price of gold.  Though it is not very probable that any part of a tax, which is not only
      imposed upon one of the most proper subjects of taxation, a mere luxury
      and superfluity, but which affords so very important a revenue as the tax
      upon silver, will ever be given up as long as it is possible to pay it;
      yet the same impossibility of paying it, which, in 1736. made it necessary
      to reduce it from one-fifth to one-tenth, may in time make it necessary to
      reduce it still further; in the same manner as it made it necessary to
      reduce the tax upon gold to one-twentieth. That the silver mines of
      Spanish America, like all other mines, become gradually more expensive in
      the working, on account of the greater depths at which it is necessary to
      carry on the works, and of the greater expense of drawing out the water,
      and of supplying them with fresh air at those depths, is acknowledged by
      everybody who has inquired into the state of those mines.  These causes, which are equivalent to a growing scarcity of silver (for a
      commodity may be said to grow scarcer when it becomes more difficult and
      expensive to collect a certain quantity of it), must, in time, produce one
      or other of the three following events: The increase of the expense must
      either, first, be compensated altogether by a proportionable increase in
      the price of the metal; or, secondly, it must be compensated altogether by
      a proportionable diminution of the tax upon silver; or, thirdly, it must
      be compensated partly by the one and partly by the other of those two
      expedients. This third event is very possible. As gold rose in its price
      in proportion to silver, notwithstanding a great diminution of the tax
      upon gold, so silver might rise in its price in proportion to labour and
      commodities, notwithstanding an equal diminution of the tax upon silver.  Such successive reductions of the tax, however, though they may not
      prevent altogether, must certainly retard, more or less, the rise of the
      value of silver in the European market. In consequence of such reductions,
      many mines may be wrought which could not be wrought before, because they
      could not afford to pay the old tax; and the quantity of silver annually
      brought to market, must always be somewhat greater, and, therefore, the
      value of any given quantity somewhat less, than it otherwise would have
      been. In consequence of the reduction in 1736, the value of silver in the
      European market, though it may not at this day be lower than before that
      reduction, is, probably, at least ten per cent. lower than it would have
      been, had the court of Spain continued to exact the old tax. That,
      notwithstanding this reduction, the value of silver has, during the course
      of the present century, begun to rise somewhat in the European market, the
      facts and arguments which have been alleged above, dispose me to believe,
      or more properly to suspect and conjecture; for the best opinion which I
      can form upon this subject, scarce, perhaps, deserves the name of belief.
      The rise, indeed, supposing there has been any, has hitherto been so very
      small, that after all that has been said, it may, perhaps, appear to many
      people uncertain, not only whether this event has actually taken place,
      but whether the contrary may not have taken place, or whether the value of
      silver may not still continue to fall in the European market.  It must be observed, however, that whatever may be the supposed annual
      importation of gold and silver, there must be a certain period at which
      the annual consumption of those metals will be equal to that annual
      importation. Their consumption must increase as their mass increases, or
      rather in a much greater proportion. As their mass increases, their value
      diminishes. They are more used, and less cared for, and their consumption
      consequently increases in a greater proportion than their mass. After a
      certain period, therefore, the annual consumption of those metals must, in
      this manner, become equal to their annual importation, provided that
      importation is not continually increasing; which, in the present times, is
      not supposed to be the case.  If, when the annual consumption has become equal to the annual
      importation, the annual importation should gradually diminish, the annual
      consumption may, for some time, exceed the annual importation. The mass of
      those metals may gradually and insensibly diminish, and their value
      gradually and insensibly rise, till the annual importation becoming again
      stationary, the annual consumption will gradually and insensibly
      accommodate itself to what that annual importation can maintain.   Grounds of the suspicion that the Value of Silver still continues to
      decrease.   The increase of the wealth of Europe, and the popular notion, that as the
      quantity of the precious metals naturally increases with the increase of
      wealth, so their value diminishes as their quantity increases, may,
      perhaps, dispose many people to believe that their value still continues
      to fall in the European market; and the still gradually increasing price
      of many parts of the rude produce of land may confirm them still farther
      in this opinion.  That that increase in the quantity of the precious metals, which arises in
      any country from the increase of wealth, has no tendency to diminish their
      value, I have endeavoured to shew already. Gold and silver naturally
      resort to a rich country, for the same reason that all sorts of luxuries
      and curiosities resort to it; not because they are cheaper there than in
      poorer countries, but because they are dearer, or because a better price
      is given for them. It is the superiority of price which attracts them; and
      as soon as that superiority ceases, they necessarily cease to go thither.  If you except corn, and such other vegetables as are raised altogether by
      human industry, that all other sorts of rude produce, cattle, poultry,
      game of all kinds, the useful fossils and minerals of the earth, etc.
      naturally grow dearer, as the society advances in wealth and improvement,
      I have endeavoured to shew already. Though such commodities, therefore,
      come to exchange for a greater quantity of silver than before, it will not
      from thence follow that silver has become really cheaper, or will purchase
      less labour than before; but that such commodities have become really
      dearer, or will purchase more labour than before. It is not their nominal
      price only, but their real price, which rises in the progress of
      improvement. The rise of their nominal price is the effect, not of any
      degradation of the value of silver, but of the rise in their real price.  Different Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon three different
      sorts of rude Produce.  These different sorts of rude produce may be divided into three classes.
      The first comprehends those which it is scarce in the power of human
      industry to multiply at all. The second, those which it can multiply in
      proportion to the demand. The third, those in which the efficacy of
      industry is either limited or uncertain. In the progress of wealth and
      improvement, the real price of the first may rise to any degree of
      extravagance, and seems not to be limited by any certain boundary. That of
      the second, though it may rise greatly, has, however, a certain boundary,
      beyond which it cannot well pass for any considerable time together. That
      of the third, though its natural tendency is to rise in the progress of
      improvement, yet in the same degree of improvement it may sometimes happen
      even to fall, sometimes to continue the same, and sometimes to rise more
      or less, according as different accidents render the efforts of human
      industry, in multiplying this sort of rude produce, more or less
      successful.  First Sort.—The first sort of rude produce, of which the price rises
      in the progress of improvement, is that which it is scarce in the power of
      human industry to multiply at all. It consists in those things which
      nature produces only in certain quantities, and which being of a very
      perishable nature, it is impossible to accumulate together the produce of
      many different seasons. Such are the greater part of rare and singular
      birds and fishes, many different sorts of game, almost all wild-fowl, all
      birds of passage in particular, as well as many other things. When wealth,
      and the luxury which accompanies it, increase, the demand for these is
      likely to increase with them, and no effort of human industry may be able
      to increase the supply much beyond what it was before this increase of the
      demand. The quantity of such commodities, therefore, remaining the same,
      or nearly the same, while the competition to purchase them is continually
      increasing, their price may rise to any degree of extravagance, and seems
      not to be limited by any certain boundary. If woodcocks should become so
      fashionable as to sell for twenty guineas a-piece, no effort of human
      industry could increase the number of those brought to market, much beyond
      what it is at present. The high price paid by the Romans, in the time of
      their greatest grandeur, for rare birds and fishes, may in this manner
      easily be accounted for. These prices were not the effects of the low
      value of silver in those times, but of the high value of such rarities and
      curiosities as human industry could not multiply at pleasure. The real
      value of silver was higher at Rome, for sometime before, and after the
      fall of the republic, than it is through the greater part of Europe at
      present. Three sestertii equal to about sixpence sterling, was the price
      which the republic paid for the modius or peck of the tithe wheat of
      Sicily. This price, however, was probably below the average market price,
      the obligation to deliver their wheat at this rate being considered as a
      tax upon the Sicilian farmers. When the Romans, therefore, had occasion to
      order more corn than the tithe of wheat amounted to, they were bound by
      capitulation to pay for the surplus at the rate of four sestertii, or
      eightpence sterling the peck; and this had probably been reckoned the
      moderate and reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average contract price
      of those times; it is equal to about one-and-twenty shillings the quarter.
      Eight-and-twenty shillings the quarter was, before the late years of
      scarcity, the ordinary contract price of English wheat, which in quality
      is inferior to the Sicilian, and generally sells for a lower price in the
      European market. The value of silver, therefore, in those ancient times,
      must have been to its value in the present, as three to four inversely;
      that is, three ounces of silver would then have purchased the same
      quantity of labour and commodities which four ounces will do at present.
      When we read in Pliny, therefore, that Seius {Lib. X, c. 29.} bought a
      white nightingale, as a present for the empress Agrippina, at the price of
      six thousand sestertii, equal to about fifty pounds of our present money;
      and that Asinius Celer {Lib. IX, c. 17.} purchased a surmullet at the
      price of eight thousand sestertii, equal to about sixty-six pounds
      thirteen shillings and fourpence of our present money; the extravagance of
      those prices, how much soever it may surprise us, is apt, notwithstanding,
      to appear to us about one third less than it really was. Their real price,
      the quantity of labour and subsistence which was given away for them, was
      about one-third more than their nominal price is apt to express to us in
      the present times. Seius gave for the nightingale the command of a
      quantity of labour and subsistence, equal to what £ 66:13: 4d. would
      purchase in the present times; and Asinius Celer gave for a surmullet the
      command of a quantity equal to what £ 88:17: 9d. would purchase. What
      occasioned the extravagance of those high prices was, not so much the
      abundance of silver, as the abundance of labour and subsistence, of which
      those Romans had the disposal, beyond what was necessary for their own
      use. The quantity of silver, of which they had the disposal, was a good
      deal less than what the command of the same quantity of labour and
      subsistence would have procured to them in the present times.  Second sort.—The second sort of rude produce, of which the price
      rises in the progress of improvement, is that which human industry can
      multiply in proportion to the demand. It consists in those useful plants
      and animals, which, in uncultivated countries, nature produces with such
      profuse abundance, that they are of little or no value, and which, as
      cultivation advances, are therefore forced to give place to some more
      profitable produce. During a long period in the progress of improvement,
      the quantity of these is continually diminishing, while, at the same time,
      the demand for them is continually increasing. Their real value,
      therefore, the real quantity of labour which they will purchase or
      command, gradually rises, till at last it gets so high as to render them
      as profitable a produce as any thing else which human industry can raise
      upon the most fertile and best cultivated land. When it has got so high,
      it cannot well go higher. If it did, more land and more industry would
      soon be employed to increase their quantity.  When the price of cattle, for example, rises so high, that it is as
      profitable to cultivate land in order to raise food for them as in order
      to raise food for man, it cannot well go higher. If it did, more corn land
      would soon be turned into pasture. The extension of tillage, by
      diminishing the quantity of wild pasture, diminishes the quantity of
      butcher’s meat, which the country naturally produces without labour or
      cultivation; and, by increasing the number of those who have either corn,
      or, what comes to the same thing, the price of corn, to give in exchange
      for it, increases the demand. The price of butcher’s meat, therefore, and,
      consequently, of cattle, must gradually rise, till it gets so high, that
      it becomes as profitable to employ the most fertile and best cultivated
      lands in raising food for them as in raising corn. But it must always be
      late in the progress of improvement before tillage can be so far extended
      as to raise the price of cattle to this height; and, till it has got to
      this height, if the country is advancing at all, their price must be
      continually rising. There are, perhaps, some parts of Europe in which the
      price of cattle has not yet got to this height. It had not got to this
      height in any part of Scotland before the Union. Had the Scotch cattle
      been always confined to the market of Scotland, in a country in which the
      quantity of land, which can be applied to no other purpose but the feeding
      of cattle, is so great in proportion to what can be applied to other
      purposes, it is scarce possible, perhaps, that their price could ever have
      risen so high as to render it profitable to cultivate land for the sake of
      feeding them. In England, the price of cattle, it has already been
      observed, seems, in the neighbourhood of London, to have got to this
      height about the beginning of the last century; but it was much later,
      probably, before it got through the greater part of the remoter counties,
      in some of which, perhaps, it may scarce yet have got to it. Of all the
      different substances, however, which compose this second sort of rude
      produce, cattle is, perhaps, that of which the price, in the progress of
      improvement, rises first to this height.  Till the price of cattle, indeed, has got to this height, it seems scarce
      possible that the greater part, even of those lands which are capable of
      the highest cultivation, can be completely cultivated. In all farms too
      distant from any town to carry manure from it, that is, in the far greater
      part of those of every extensive country, the quantity of well cultivated
      land must be in proportion to the quantity of manure which the farm itself
      produces; and this, again, must be in proportion to the stock of cattle
      which are maintained upon it. The land is manured, either by pasturing the
      cattle upon it, or by feeding them in the stable, and from thence carrying
      out their dung to it. But unless the price of the cattle be sufficient to
      pay both the rent and profit of cultivated land, the farmer cannot afford
      to pasture them upon it; and he can still less afford to feed them in the
      stable. It is with the produce of improved and cultivated land only that
      cattle can be fed in the stable; because, to collect the scanty and
      scattered produce of waste and unimproved lands, would require too much
      labour, and be too expensive. It the price of the cattle, therefore, is
      not sufficient to pay for the produce of improved and cultivated land,
      when they are allowed to pasture it, that price will be still less
      sufficient to pay for that produce, when it must be collected with a good
      deal of additional labour, and brought into the stable to them. In these
      circumstances, therefore, no more cattle can with profit be fed in the
      stable than what are necessary for tillage. But these can never afford
      manure enough for keeping constantly in good condition all the lands which
      they are capable of cultivating. What they afford, being insufficient for
      the whole farm, will naturally be reserved for the lands to which it can
      be most advantageously or conveniently applied; the most fertile, or
      those, perhaps, in the neighbourhood of the farm-yard. These, therefore,
      will be kept constantly in good condition, and fit for tillage. The rest
      will, the greater part of them, be allowed to lie waste, producing scarce
      any thing but some miserable pasture, just sufficient to keep alive a few
      straggling, half-starved cattle; the farm, though much overstocked in
      proportion to what would be necessary for its complete cultivation, being
      very frequently overstocked in proportion to its actual produce. A portion
      of this waste land, however, after having been pastured in this wretched
      manner for six or seven years together, may be ploughed up, when it will
      yield, perhaps, a poor crop or two of bad oats, or of some other coarse
      grain; and then, being entirely exhausted, it must be rested and pastured
      again as before, and another portion ploughed up, to be in the same manner
      exhausted and rested again in its turn. Such, accordingly, was the general
      system of management all over the low country of Scotland before the
      Union. The lands which were kept constantly well manured and in good
      condition seldom exceeded a third or fourth part of the whole farm, and
      sometimes did not amount to a fifth or a sixth part of it. The rest were
      never manured, but a certain portion of them was in its turn,
      notwithstanding, regularly cultivated and exhausted. Under this system of
      management, it is evident, even that part of the lands of Scotland which
      is capable of good cultivation, could produce but little in comparison of
      what it may be capable of producing. But how disadvantageous soever this
      system may appear, yet, before the Union, the low price of cattle seems to
      have rendered it almost unavoidable. If, notwithstanding a great rise in
      the price, it still continues to prevail through a considerable part of
      the country, it is owing in many places, no doubt, to ignorance and
      attachment to old customs, but, in most places, to the unavoidable
      obstructions which the natural course of things opposes to the immediate
      or speedy establishment of a better system: first, to the poverty of the
      tenants, to their not having yet had time to acquire a stock of cattle
      sufficient to cultivate their lands more completely, the same rise of
      price, which would render it advantageous for them to maintain a greater
      stock, rendering it more difficult for them to acquire it; and, secondly,
      to their not having yet had time to put their lands in condition to
      maintain this greater stock properly, supposing they were capable of
      acquiring it. The increase of stock and the improvement of land are two
      events which must go hand in hand, and of which the one can nowhere much
      outrun the other. Without some increase of stock, there can be scarce any
      improvement of land, but there can be no considerable increase of stock,
      but in consequence of a considerable improvement of land; because
      otherwise the land could not maintain it. These natural obstructions to
      the establishment of a better system, cannot be removed but by a long
      course of frugality and industry; and half a century or a century more,
      perhaps, must pass away before the old system, which is wearing out
      gradually, can be completely abolished through all the different parts of
      the country. Of all the commercial advantages, however, which Scotland has
      derived from the Union with England, this rise in the price of cattle is,
      perhaps, the greatest. It has not only raised the value of all highland
      estates, but it has, perhaps, been the principal cause of the improvement
      of the low country.  In all new colonies, the great quantity of waste land, which can for many
      years be applied to no other purpose but the feeding of cattle, soon
      renders them extremely abundant; and in every thing great cheapness is the
      necessary consequence of great abundance. Though all the cattle of the
      European colonies in America were originally carried from Europe, they
      soon multiplied so much there, and became of so little value, that even
      horses were allowed to run wild in the woods, without any owner thinking
      it worth while to claim them. It must be a long time after the first
      establishment of such colonies, before it can become profitable to feed
      cattle upon the produce of cultivated land. The same causes, therefore,
      the want of manure, and the disproportion between the stock employed in
      cultivation and the land which it is destined to cultivate, are likely to
      introduce there a system of husbandry, not unlike that which still
      continues to take place in so many parts of Scotland. Mr Kalm, the Swedish
      traveller, when he gives an account of the husbandry of some of the
      English colonies in North America, as he found it in 1749, observes,
      accordingly, that he can with difficulty discover there the character of
      the English nation, so well skilled in all the different branches of
      agriculture. They make scarce any manure for their corn fields, he says;
      but when one piece of ground has been exhausted by continual cropping,
      they clear and cultivate another piece of fresh land; and when that is
      exhausted, proceed to a third. Their cattle are allowed to wander through
      the woods and other uncultivated grounds, where they are half-starved;
      having long ago extirpated almost all the annual grasses, by cropping them
      too early in the spring, before they had time to form their flowers, or to
      shed their seeds. {Kalm’s Travels, vol 1, pp. 343, 344.} The annual
      grasses were, it seems, the best natural grasses in that part of North
      America; and when the Europeans first settled there, they used to grow
      very thick, and to rise three or four feet high. A piece of ground which,
      when he wrote, could not maintain one cow, would in former times, he was
      assured, have maintained four, each of which would have given four times
      the quantity of milk which that one was capable of giving. The poorness of
      the pasture had, in his opinion, occasioned the degradation of their
      cattle, which degenerated sensibly from me generation to another. They
      were probably not unlike that stunted breed which was common all over
      Scotland thirty or forty years ago, and which is now so much mended
      through the greater part of the low country, not so much by a change of
      the breed, though that expedient has been employed in some places, as by a
      more plentiful method of feeding them.  Though it is late, therefore, in the progress of improvement, before
      cattle can bring such a price as to render it profitable to cultivate land
      for the sake of feeding them; yet of all the different parts which compose
      this second sort of rude produce, they are perhaps the first which bring
      this price; because, till they bring it, it seems impossible that
      improvement can be brought near even to that degree of perfection to which
      it has arrived in many parts of Europe.  As cattle are among the first, so perhaps venison is among the last parts
      of this sort of rude produce which bring this price. The price of venison
      in Great Britain, how extravagant soever it may appear, is not near
      sufficient to compensate the expense of a deer park, as is well known to
      all those who have had any experience in the feeding of deer. If it was
      otherwise, the feeding of deer would soon become an article of common
      farming, in the same manner as the feeding of those small birds, called
      turdi, was among the ancient Romans. Varro and Columella assure us, that
      it was a most profitable article. The fattening of ortolans, birds of
      passage which arrive lean in the country, is said to be so in some parts
      of France. If venison continues in fashion, and the wealth and luxury of
      Great Britain increase as they have done for some time past, its price may
      very probably rise still higher than it is at present.  Between that period in the progress of improvement, which brings to its
      height the price of so necessary an article as cattle, and that which
      brings to it the price of such a superfluity as venison, there is a very
      long interval, in the course of which many other sorts of rude produce
      gradually arrive at their highest price, some sooner and some later,
      according to different circumstances.  Thus, in every farm, the offals of the barn and stable will maintain a
      certain number of poultry. These, as they are fed with what would
      otherwise be lost, are a mere save-all; and as they cost the farmer scarce
      any thing, so he can afford to sell them for very little. Almost all that
      he gets is pure gain, and their price can scarce be so low as to
      discourage him from feeding this number. But in countries ill cultivated,
      and therefore but thinly inhabited, the poultry, which are thus raised
      without expense, are often fully sufficient to supply the whole demand. In
      this state of things, therefore, they are often as cheap as butcher’s
      meat, or any other sort of animal food. But the whole quantity of poultry
      which the farm in this manner produces without expense, must always be
      much smaller than the whole quantity of butcher’s meat which is reared
      upon it; and in times of wealth and luxury, what is rare, with only nearly
      equal merit, is always preferred to what is common. As wealth and luxury
      increase, therefore, in consequence of improvement and cultivation, the
      price of poultry gradually rises above that of butcher’s meat, till at
      last it gets so high, that it becomes profitable to cultivate land for the
      sake of feeding them. When it has got to this height, it cannot well go
      higher. If it did, more land would soon be turned to this purpose. In
      several provinces of France, the feeding of poultry is considered as a
      very important article in rural economy, and sufficiently profitable to
      encourage the farmer to raise a considerable quantity of Indian corn and
      buckwheat for this purpose. A middling farmer will there sometimes have
      four hundred fowls in his yard. The feeding of poultry seems scarce yet to
      be generally considered as a matter of so much importance in England. They
      are certainly, however, dearer in England than in France, as England
      receives considerable supplies from France. In the progress of
      improvements, the period at which every particular sort of animal food is
      dearest, must naturally be that which immediately precedes the general
      practice of cultivating land for the sake of raising it. For some time
      before this practice becomes general, the scarcity must necessarily raise
      the price. After it has become general, new methods of feeding are
      commonly fallen upon, which enable the farmer to raise upon the same
      quantity of ground a much greater quantity of that particular sort of
      animal food. The plenty not only obliges him to sell cheaper, but, in
      consequence of these improvements, he can afford to sell cheaper; for if
      he could not afford it, the plenty would not be of long continuance. It
      has been probably in this manner that the introduction of clover, turnips,
      carrots, cabbages, etc. has contributed to sink the common price of
      butcher’s meat in the London market, somewhat below what it was about the
      beginning of the last century.  The hog, that finds his food among ordure, and greedily devours many
      things rejected by every other useful animal, is, like poultry, originally
      kept as a save-all. As long as the number of such animals, which can thus
      be reared at little or no expense, is fully sufficient to supply the
      demand, this sort of butcher’s meat comes to market at a much lower price
      than any other. But when the demand rises beyond what this quantity can
      supply, when it becomes necessary to raise food on purpose for feeding and
      fattening hogs, in the same manner as for feeding and fattening other
      cattle, the price necessarily rises, and becomes proportionably either
      higher or lower than that of other butcher’s meat, according as the nature
      of the country, and the state of its agriculture, happen to render the
      feeding of hogs more or less expensive than that of other cattle. In
      France, according to Mr Buffon, the price of pork is nearly equal to that
      of beef. In most parts of Great Britain it is at present somewhat higher.  The great rise in the price both of hogs and poultry, has, in Great
      Britain, been frequently imputed to the diminution of the number of
      cottagers and other small occupiers of land; an event which has in every
      part of Europe been the immediate forerunner of improvement and better
      cultivation, but which at the same time may have contributed to raise the
      price of those articles, both somewhat sooner and somewhat faster than it
      would otherwise have risen. As the poorest family can often maintain a cat
      or a dog without any expense, so the poorest occupiers of land can
      commonly maintain a few poultry, or a sow and a few pigs, at very little.
      The little offals of their own table, their whey, skimmed milk, and butter
      milk, supply those animals with a part of their food, and they find the
      rest in the neighbouring fields, without doing any sensible damage to any
      body. By diminishing the number of those small occupiers, therefore, the
      quantity of this sort of provisions, which is thus produced at little or
      no expense, must certainly have been a good deal diminished, and their
      price must consequently have been raised both sooner and faster than it
      would otherwise have risen. Sooner or later, however, in the progress of
      improvement, it must at any rate have risen to the utmost height to which
      it is capable of rising; or to the price which pays the labour and expense
      of cultivating the land which furnishes them with food, as well as these
      are paid upon the greater part of other cultivated land.  The business of the dairy, like the feeding of hogs and poultry, is
      originally carried on as a save-all. The cattle necessarily kept upon the
      farm produce more milk than either the rearing of their own young, or the
      consumption of the farmer’s family requires; and they produce most at one
      particular season. But of all the productions of land, milk is perhaps the
      most perishable. In the warm season, when it is most abundant, it will
      scarce keep four-and-twenty hours. The farmer, by making it into fresh
      butter, stores a small part of it for a week; by making it into salt
      butter, for a year; and by making it into cheese, he stores a much greater
      part of it for several years. Part of all these is reserved for the use of
      his own family; the rest goes to market, in order to find the best price
      which is to be had, and which can scarce be so low is to discourage him
      from sending thither whatever is over and above the use of his own family.
      If it is very low indeed, he will be likely to manage his dairy in a very
      slovenly and dirty manner, and will scarce, perhaps, think it worth while
      to have a particular room or building on purpose for it, but will suffer
      the business to be carried on amidst the smoke, filth, and nastiness of
      his own kitchen, as was the case of almost all the farmers’ dairies in
      Scotland thirty or forty years ago, and as is the case of many of them
      still. The same causes which gradually raise the price of butcher’s meat,
      the increase of the demand, and, in consequence of the improvement of the
      country, the diminution of the quantity which can be fed at little or no
      expense, raise, in the same manner, that of the produce of the dairy, of
      which the price naturally connects with that of butcher’s meat, or with
      the expense of feeding cattle. The increase of price pays for more labour,
      care, and cleanliness. The dairy becomes more worthy of the farmer’s
      attention, and the quality of its produce gradually improves. The price at
      last gets so high, that it becomes worth while to employ some of the most
      fertile and best cultivated lands in feeding cattle merely for the purpose
      of the dairy; and when it has got to this height, it cannot well go
      higher. If it did, more land would soon be turned to this purpose. It
      seems to have got to this height through the greater part of England,
      where much good land is commonly employed in this manner. If you except
      the neighbourhood of a few considerable towns, it seems not yet to have
      got to this height anywhere in Scotland, where common farmers seldom
      employ much good land in raising food for cattle, merely for the purpose
      of the dairy. The price of the produce, though it has risen very
      considerably within these few years, is probably still too low to admit of
      it. The inferiority of the quality, indeed, compared with that of the
      produce of English dairies, is fully equal to that of the price. But this
      inferiority of quality is, perhaps, rather the effect of this lowness of
      price, than the cause of it. Though the quality was much better, the
      greater part of what is brought to market could not, I apprehend, in the
      present circumstances of the country, be disposed of at a much better
      price; and the present price, it is probable, would not pay the expense of
      the land and labour necessary for producing a much better quality. Through
      the greater part of England, notwithstanding the superiority of price, the
      dairy is not reckoned a more profitable employment of land than the
      raising of corn, or the fattening of cattle, the two great objects of
      agriculture. Through the greater part of Scotland, therefore, it cannot
      yet be even so profitable.  The lands of no country, it is evident, can ever be completely cultivated
      and improved, till once the price of every produce, which human industry
      is obliged to raise upon them, has got so high as to pay for the expense
      of complete improvement and cultivation. In order to do this, the price of
      each particular produce must be sufficient, first, to pay the rent of good
      corn land, as it is that which regulates the rent of the greater part of
      other cultivated land; and, secondly, to pay the labour and expense of the
      farmer, as well as they are commonly paid upon good corn land; or, in
      other words, to replace with the ordinary profits the stock which he
      employs about it. This rise in the price of each particular produce; must
      evidently be previous to the improvement and cultivation of the land which
      is destined for raising it. Gain is the end of all improvement; and
      nothing could deserve that name, of which loss was to be the necessary
      consequence. But loss must be the necessary consequence of improving land
      for the sake of a produce of which the price could never bring back the
      expense. If the complete improvement and cultivation of the country be, as
      it most certainly is, the greatest of all public advantages, this rise in
      the price of all those different sorts of rude produce, instead of being
      considered as a public calamity, ought to be regarded as the necessary
      forerunner and attendant of the greatest of all public advantages.  This rise, too, in the nominal or money price of all those different sorts
      of rude produce, has been the effect, not of any degradation in the value
      of silver, but of a rise in their real price. They have become worth, not
      only a greater quantity of silver, but a greater quantity of labour and
      subsistence than before. As it costs a greater quantity of labour and
      subsistence to bring them to market, so, when they are brought thither
      they represent, or are equivalent to a greater quantity.  Third Sort.—The third and last sort of rude produce, of which the
      price naturally rises in the progress of improvement, is that in which the
      efficacy of human industry, in augmenting the quantity, is either limited
      or uncertain. Though the real price of this sort of rude produce,
      therefore, naturally tends to rise in the progress of improvement, yet,
      according as different accidents happen to render the efforts of human
      industry more or less successful in augmenting the quantity, it may happen
      sometimes even to fall, sometimes to continue the same, in very different
      periods of improvement, and sometimes to rise more or less in the same
      period.  There are some sorts of rude produce which nature has rendered a kind of
      appendages to other sorts; so that the quantity of the one which any
      country can afford, is necessarily limited by that of the other. The
      quantity of wool or of raw hides, for example, which any country can
      afford, is necessarily limited by the number of great and small cattle
      that are kept in it. The state of its improvement, and the nature of its
      agriculture, again necessarily determine this number.  The same causes which, in the progress of improvement, gradually raise the
      price of butcher’s meat, should have the same effect, it may be thought,
      upon the prices of wool and raw hides, and raise them, too, nearly in the
      same proportion. It probably would be so, if, in the rude beginnings of
      improvement, the market for the latter commodities was confined within as
      narrow bounds as that for the former. But the extent of their respective
      markets is commonly extremely different.  The market for butcher’s meat is almost everywhere confined to the country
      which produces it. Ireland, and some part of British America, indeed,
      carry on a considerable trade in salt provisions; but they are, I believe,
      the only countries in the commercial world which do so, or which export to
      other countries any considerable part of their butcher’s meat.  The market for wool and raw hides, on the contrary, is, in the rude
      beginnings of improvement, very seldom confined to the country which
      produces them. They can easily be transported to distant countries; wool
      without any preparation, and raw hides with very little; and as they are
      the materials of many manufactures, the industry of other countries may
      occasion a demand for them, though that of the country which produces them
      might not occasion any.  In countries ill cultivated, and therefore but thinly inhabited, the price
      of the wool and the hide bears always a much greater proportion to that of
      the whole beast, than in countries where, improvement and population being
      further advanced, there is more demand for butcher’s meat. Mr Hume
      observes, that in the Saxon times, the fleece was estimated at two-fifths
      of the value of the whole sheep and that this was much above the
      proportion of its present estimation. In some provinces of Spain, I have
      been assured, the sheep is frequently killed merely for the sake of the
      fleece and the tallow. The carcase is often left to rot upon the ground,
      or to be devoured by beasts and birds of prey. If this sometimes happens
      even in Spain, it happens almost constantly in Chili, at Buenos Ayres, and
      in many other parts of Spanish America, where the horned cattle are almost
      constantly killed merely for the sake of the hide and the tallow. This,
      too, used to happen almost constantly in Hispaniola, while it was infested
      by the buccaneers, and before the settlement, improvement, and
      populousness of the French plantations ( which now extend round the coast
      of almost the whole western half of the island) had given some value to
      the cattle of the Spaniards, who still continue to possess, not only the
      eastern part of the coast, but the whole inland mountainous part of the
      country.  Though, in the progress of improvement and population, the price of the
      whole beast necessarily rises, yet the price of the carcase is likely to
      be much more affected by this rise than that of the wool and the hide. The
      market for the carcase being in the rude state of society confined always
      to the country which produces it, must necessarily be extended in
      proportion to the improvement and population of that country. But the
      market for the wool and the hides, even of a barbarous country, often
      extending to the whole commercial world, it can very seldom be enlarged in
      the same proportion. The state of the whole commercial world can seldom be
      much affected by the improvement of any particular country; and the market
      for such commodities may remain the same, or very nearly the same, after
      such improvements, as before. It should, however, in the natural course of
      things, rather, upon the whole, be somewhat extended in consequence of
      them. If the manufactures, especially, of which those commodities are the
      materials, should ever come to flourish in the country, the market, though
      it might not be much enlarged, would at least be brought much nearer to
      the place of growth than before; and the price of those materials might at
      least be increased by what had usually been the expense of transporting
      them to distant countries. Though it might not rise, therefore, in the
      same proportion as that of butcher’s meat, it ought naturally to rise
      somewhat, and it ought certainly not to fall.  In England, however, notwithstanding the flourishing state of its woollen
      manufacture, the price of English wool has fallen very considerably since
      the time of Edward III. There are many authentic records which demonstrate
      that, during the reign of that prince (towards the middle of the
      fourteenth century, or about 1339), what was reckoned the moderate and
      reasonable price of the tod, or twenty-eight pounds of English wool, was
      not less than ten shillings of the money of those times {See Smith’s
      Memoirs of Wool, vol. i c. 5, 6, 7. also vol. ii.}, containing, at the
      rate of twenty-pence the ounce, six ounces of silver, Tower weight, equal
      to about thirty shillings of our present money. In the present times,
      one-and-twenty shillings the tod may be reckoned a good price for very
      good English wool. The money price of wool, therefore, in the time of
      Edward III. was to its money price in the present times as ten to seven.
      The superiority of its real price was still greater. At the rate of six
      shillings and eightpence the quarter, ten shillings was in those ancient
      times the price of twelve bushels of wheat. At the rate of twenty-eight
      shillings the quarter, one-and-twenty shillings is in the present times
      the price of six bushels only. The proportion between the real price of
      ancient and modern times, therefore, is as twelve to six, or as two to
      one. In those ancient times, a tod of wool would have purchased twice the
      quantity of subsistence which it will purchase at present, and
      consequently twice the quantity of labour, if the real recompence of
      labour had been the same in both periods.  This degradation, both in the real and nominal value of wool, could never
      have happened in consequence of the natural course of things. It has
      accordingly been the effect of violence and artifice. First, of the
      absolute prohibition of exporting wool from England: secondly, of the
      permission of importing it from Spain, duty free: thirdly, of the
      prohibition of exporting it from Ireland to another country but England.
      In consequence of these regulations, the market for English wool, instead
      of being somewhat extended, in consequence of the improvement of England,
      has been confined to the home market, where the wool of several other
      countries is allowed to come into competition with it, and where that of
      Ireland is forced into competition with it. As the woollen manufactures,
      too, of Ireland, are fully as much discouraged as is consistent with
      justice and fair dealing, the Irish can work up but a smaller part of
      their own wool at home, and are therefore obliged to send a greater
      proportion of it to Great Britain, the only market they are allowed.  I have not been able to find any such authentic records concerning the
      price of raw hides in ancient times. Wool was commonly paid as a subsidy
      to the king, and its valuation in that subsidy ascertains, at least in
      some degree, what was its ordinary price. But this seems not to have been
      the case with raw hides. Fleetwood, however, from an account in 1425,
      between the prior of Burcester Oxford and one of his canons, gives us
      their price, at least as it was stated upon that particular occasion, viz.
      five ox hides at twelve shillings; five cow hides at seven shillings and
      threepence; thirtysix sheep skins of two years old at nine shillings;
      sixteen calf skins at two shillings. In 1425, twelve shillings contained
      about the same quantity of silver as four-and-twenty shillings of our
      present money. An ox hide, therefore, was in this account valued at the
      same quantity of silver as 4s. 4/5ths of our present money. Its nominal
      price was a good deal lower than at present. But at the rate of six
      shillings and eightpence the quarter, twelve shillings would in those
      times have purchased fourteen bushels and four-fifths of a bushel of
      wheat, which, at three and sixpence the bushel, would in the present times
      cost 51s. 4d. An ox hide, therefore, would in those times have purchased
      as much corn as ten shillings and threepence would purchase at present.
      Its real value was equal to ten shillings and threepence of our present
      money. In those ancient times, when the cattle were half starved during
      the greater part of the winter, we cannot suppose that they were of a very
      large size. An ox hide which weighs four stone of sixteen pounds of
      avoirdupois, is not in the present times reckoned a bad one; and in those
      ancient times would probably have been reckoned a very good one. But at
      half-a-crown the stone, which at this moment (February 1773) I understand
      to be the common price, such a hide would at present cost only ten
      shillings. Through its nominal price, therefore, is higher in the present
      than it was in those ancient times, its real price, the real quantity of
      subsistence which it will purchase or command, is rather somewhat lower.
      The price of cow hides, as stated in the above account, is nearly in the
      common proportion to that of ox hides. That of sheep skins is a good deal
      above it. They had probably been sold with the wool. That of calves skins,
      on the contrary, is greatly below it. In countries where the price of
      cattle is very low, the calves, which are not intended to be reared in
      order to keep up the stock, are generally killed very young, as was the
      case in Scotland twenty or thirty years ago. It saves the milk, which
      their price would not pay for. Their skins, therefore, are commonly good
      for little.  The price of raw hides is a good deal lower at present than it was a few
      years ago; owing probably to the taking off the duty upon seal skins, and
      to the allowing, for a limited time, the importation of raw hides from
      Ireland, and from the plantations, duty free, which was done in 1769. Take
      the whole of the present century at an average, their real price has
      probably been somewhat higher than it was in those ancient times. The
      nature of the commodity renders it not quite so proper for being
      transported to distant markets as wool. It suffers more by keeping. A
      salted hide is reckoned inferior to a fresh one, and sells for a lower
      price. This circumstance must necessarily have some tendency to sink the
      price of raw hides produced in a country which does not manufacture them,
      but is obliged to export them, and comparatively to raise that of those
      produced in a country which does manufacture them. It must have some
      tendency to sink their price in a barbarous, and to raise it in an
      improved and manufacturing country. It must have had some tendency,
      therefore, to sink it in ancient, and to raise it in modern times. Our
      tanners, besides, have not been quite so successful as our clothiers, in
      convincing the wisdom of the nation, that the safety of the commonwealth
      depends upon the prosperity of their particular manufacture. They have
      accordingly been much less favoured. The exportation of raw hides has,
      indeed, been prohibited, and declared a nuisance; but their importation
      from foreign countries has been subjected to a duty; and though this duty
      has been taken off from those of Ireland and the plantations (for the
      limited time of five years only), yet Ireland has not been confined to the
      market of Great Britain for the sale of its surplus hides, or of those
      which are not manufactured at home. The hides of common cattle have, but
      within these few years, been put among the enumerated commodities which
      the plantations can send nowhere but to the mother country; neither has
      the commerce of Ireland been in this case oppressed hitherto, in order to
      support the manufactures of Great Britain.  Whatever regulations tend to sink the price, either of wool or of raw
      hides, below what it naturally would he, must, in an improved and
      cultivated country, have some tendency to raise the price of butcher’s
      meat. The price both of the great and small cattle, which are fed on
      improved and cultivated land, must be sufficient to pay the rent which the
      landlord, and the profit which the farmer, has reason to expect from
      improved and cultivated land. If it is not, they will soon cease to feed
      them. Whatever part of this price, therefore, is not paid by the wool and
      the hide, must be paid by the carcase. The less there is paid for the one,
      the more must be paid for the other. In what manner this price is to be
      divided upon the different parts of the beast, is indifferent to the
      landlords and farmers, provided it is all paid to them. In an improved and
      cultivated country, therefore, their interest as landlords and farmers
      cannot be much affected by such regulations, though their interest as
      consumers may, by the rise in the price of provisions. It would be quite
      otherwise, however, in an unimproved and uncultivated country, where the
      greater part of the lands could be applied to no other purpose but the
      feeding of cattle, and where the wool and the hide made the principal part
      of the value of those cattle. Their interest as landlords and farmers
      would in this case be very deeply affected by such regulations, and their
      interest as consumers very little. The fall in the price of the wool and
      the hide would not in this case raise the price of the carcase; because
      the greater part of the lands of the country being applicable to no other
      purpose but the feeding of cattle, the same number would still continue to
      be fed. The same quantity of butcher’s meat would still come to market.
      The demand for it would be no greater than before. Its price, therefore,
      would be the same as before. The whole price of cattle would fall, and
      along with it both the rent and the profit of all those lands of which
      cattle was the principal produce, that is, of the greater part of the
      lands of the country. The perpetual prohibition of the exportation of
      wool, which is commonly, but very falsely, ascribed to Edward III., would,
      in the then circumstances of the country, have been the most destructive
      regulation which could well have been thought of. It would not only have
      reduced the actual value of the greater part of the lands in the kingdom,
      but by reducing the price of the most important species of small cattle,
      it would have retarded very much its subsequent improvement.  The wool of Scotland fell very considerably in its price in consequence of
      the union with England, by which it was excluded from the great market of
      Europe, and confined to the narrow one of Great Britain. The value of the
      greater part of the lands in the southern counties of Scotland, which are
      chiefly a sheep country, would have been very deeply affected by this
      event, had not the rise in the price of butcher’s meat fully compensated
      the fall in the price of wool.  As the efficacy of human industry, in increasing the quantity either of
      wool or of raw hides, is limited, so far as it depends upon the produce of
      the country where it is exerted; so it is uncertain so far as it depends
      upon the produce of other countries. It so far depends not so much upon
      the quantity which they produce, as upon that which they do not
      manufacture; and upon the restraints which they may or may not think
      proper to impose upon the exportation of this sort of rude produce. These
      circumstances, as they are altogether independent of domestic industry, so
      they necessarily render the efficacy of its efforts more or less
      uncertain. In multiplying this sort of rude produce, therefore, the
      efficacy of human industry is not only limited, but uncertain.  In multiplying another very important sort of rude produce, the quantity
      of fish that is brought to market, it is likewise both limited and
      uncertain. It is limited by the local situation of the country, by the
      proximity or distance of its different provinces from the sea, by the
      number of its lakes and rivers, and by what may be called the fertility or
      barrenness of those seas, lakes, and rivers, as to this sort of rude
      produce. As population increases, as the annual produce of the land and
      labour of the country grows greater and greater, there come to be more
      buyers of fish; and those buyers, too, have a greater quantity and variety
      of other goods, or, what is the same thing, the price of a greater
      quantity and variety of other goods, to buy with. But it will generally be
      impossible to supply the great and extended market, without employing a
      quantity of labour greater than in proportion to what had been requisite
      for supplying the narrow and confined one. A market which, from requiring
      only one thousand, comes to require annually ten thousand ton of fish, can
      seldom be supplied, without employing more than ten times the quantity of
      labour which had before been sufficient to supply it. The fish must
      generally be sought for at a greater distance, larger vessels must be
      employed, and more expensive machinery of every kind made use of. The real
      price of this commodity, therefore, naturally rises in the progress of
      improvement. It has accordingly done so, I believe, more or less in every
      country.  Though the success of a particular day’s fishing maybe a very uncertain
      matter, yet the local situation of the country being supposed, the general
      efficacy of industry in bringing a certain quantity of fish to market,
      taking the course of a year, or of several years together, it may,
      perhaps, be thought is certain enough; and it, no doubt, is so. As it
      depends more, however, upon the local situation of the country, than upon
      the state of its wealth and industry; as upon this account it may in
      different countries be the same in very different periods of improvement,
      and very different in the same period; its connection with the state of
      improvement is uncertain; and it is of this sort of uncertainty that I am
      here speaking.  In increasing the quantity of the different minerals and metals which are
      drawn from the bowels of the earth, that of the more precious ones
      particularly, the efficacy of human industry seems not to be limited, but
      to be altogether uncertain.  The quantity of the precious metals which is to be found in any country,
      is not limited by any thing in its local situation, such as the fertility
      or barrenness of its own mines. Those metals frequently abound in
      countries which possess no mines. Their quantity, in every particular
      country, seems to depend upon two different circumstances; first, upon its
      power of purchasing, upon the state of its industry, upon the annual
      produce of its land and labour, in consequence of which it can afford to
      employ a greater or a smaller quantity of labour and subsistence, in
      bringing or purchasing such superfluities as gold and silver, either from
      its own mines, or from those of other countries; and, secondly, upon the
      fertility or barrenness of the mines which may happen at any particular
      time to supply the commercial world with those metals. The quantity of
      those metals in the countries most remote from the mines, must be more or
      less affected by this fertility or barrenness, on account of the easy and
      cheap transportation of those metals, of their small bulk and great value.
      Their quantity in China and Indostan must have been more or less affected
      by the abundance of the mines of America.  So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon the former
      of those two circumstances (the power of purchasing), their real price,
      like that of all other luxuries and superfluities, is likely to rise with
      the wealth and improvement of the country, and to fall with its poverty
      and depression. Countries which have a great quantity of labour and
      subsistence to spare, can afford to purchase any particular quantity of
      those metals at the expense of a greater quantity of labour and
      subsistence, than countries which have less to spare.  So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon the latter
      of those two circumstances (the fertility or barrenness of the mines which
      happen to supply the commercial world), their real price, the real
      quantity of labour and subsistence which they will purchase or exchange
      for, will, no doubt, sink more or less in proportion to the fertility, and
      rise in proportion to the barrenness of those mines.  The fertility or barrenness of the mines, however, which may happen at any
      particular time to supply the commercial world, is a circumstance which,
      it is evident, may have no sort of connection with the state of industry
      in a particular country. It seems even to have no very necessary
      connection with that of the world in general. As arts and commerce,
      indeed, gradually spread themselves over a greater and a greater part of
      the earth, the search for new mines, being extended over a wider surface,
      may have somewhat a better chance for being successful than when confined
      within narrower bounds. The discovery of new mines, however, as the old
      ones come to be gradually exhausted, is a matter of the greatest
      uncertainty, and such as no human skill or industry can insure. All
      indications, it is acknowledged, are doubtful; and the actual discovery
      and successful working of a new mine can alone ascertain the reality of
      its value, or even of its existence. In this search there seem to be no
      certain limits, either to the possible success, or to the possible
      disappointment of human industry. In the course of a century or two, it is
      possible that new mines may be discovered, more fertile than any that have
      ever yet been known; and it is just equally possible, that the most
      fertile mine then known may be more barren than any that was wrought
      before the discovery of the mines of America. Whether the one or the other
      of those two events may happen to take place, is of very little importance
      to the real wealth and prosperity of the world, to the real value of the
      annual produce of the land and labour of mankind. Its nominal value, the
      quantity of gold and silver by which this annual produce could be
      expressed or represented, would, no doubt, be very different; but its real
      value, the real quantity of labour which it could purchase or command,
      would be precisely the same. A shilling might, in the one case, represent
      no more labour than a penny does at present; and a penny, in the other,
      might represent as much as a shilling does now. But in the one case, he
      who had a shilling in his pocket would be no richer than he who has a
      penny at present; and in the other, he who had a penny would be just as
      rich as he who has a shilling now. The cheapness and abundance of gold and
      silver plate would be the sole advantage which the world could derive from
      the one event; and the dearness and scarcity of those trifling
      superfluities, the only inconveniency it could suffer from the other.  Conclusion of the Digression concerning the Variations in the Value of
      Silver.  The greater part of the writers who have collected the money price of
      things in ancient times, seem to have considered the low money price of
      corn, and of goods in general, or, in other words, the high value of gold
      and silver, as a proof, not only of the scarcity of those metals, but of
      the poverty and barbarism of the country at the time when it took place.
      This notion is connected with the system of political economy, which
      represents national wealth as consisting in the abundance and national
      poverty in the scarcity, of gold and silver; a system which I shall
      endeavour to explain and examine at great length in the fourth book of
      this Inquiry. I shall only observe at present, that the high value of the
      precious metals can be no proof of the poverty or barbarism of any
      particular country at the time when it took place. It is a proof only of
      the barrenness of the mines which happened at that time to supply the
      commercial world. A poor country, as it cannot afford to buy more, so it
      can as little afford to pay dearer for gold and silver than a rich one;
      and the value of those metals, therefore, is not likely to be higher in
      the former than in the latter. In China, a country much richer than any
      part of Europe, the value of the precious metals is much higher than in
      any part of Europe. As the wealth of Europe, indeed, has increased greatly
      since the discovery of the mines of America, so the value of gold and
      silver has gradually diminished. This diminution of their value, however,
      has not been owing to the increase of the real wealth of Europe, of the
      annual produce of its land and labour, but to the accidental discovery of
      more abundant mines than any that were known before. The increase of the
      quantity of gold and silver in Europe, and the increase of its
      manufactures and agriculture, are two events which, though they have
      happened nearly about the same time, yet have arisen from very different
      causes, and have scarce any natural connection with one another. The one
      has arisen from a mere accident, in which neither prudence nor policy
      either had or could have any share; the other, from the fall of the feudal
      system, and from the establishment of a government which afforded to
      industry the only encouragement which it requires, some tolerable security
      that it shall enjoy the fruits of its own labour. Poland, where the feudal
      system still continues to take place, is at this day as beggarly a country
      as it was before the discovery of America. The money price of corn,
      however, has risen; the real value of the precious metals has fallen in
      Poland, in the same manner as in other parts of Europe. Their quantity,
      therefore, must have increased there as in other places, and nearly in the
      same proportion to the annual produce of its land and labour. This
      increase of the quantity of those metals, however, has not, it seems,
      increased that annual produce, has neither improved the manufactures and
      agriculture of the country, nor mended the circumstances of its
      inhabitants. Spain and Portugal, the countries which possess the mines,
      are, after Poland, perhaps the two most beggarly countries in Europe. The
      value of the precious metals, however, must be lower in Spain and Portugal
      than in any other part of Europe, as they come from those countries to all
      other parts of Europe, loaded, not only with a freight and an insurance,
      but with the expense of smuggling, their exportation being either
      prohibited or subjected to a duty. In proportion to the annual produce of
      the land and labour, therefore, their quantity must be greater in those
      countries than in any other part of Europe; those countries, however, are
      poorer than the greater part of Europe. Though the feudal system has been
      abolished in Spain and Portugal, it has not been succeeded by a much
      better.  As the low value of gold and silver, therefore, is no proof of the wealth
      and flourishing state of the country where it takes place; so neither is
      their high value, or the low money price either of goods in general, or of
      corn in particular, any proof of its poverty and barbarism.  But though the low money price, either of goods in general, or of corn in
      particular, be no proof of the poverty or barbarism of the times, the low
      money price of some particular sorts of goods, such as cattle, poultry,
      game of all kinds, etc. in proportion to that of corn, is a most decisive
      one. It clearly demonstrates, first, their great abundance in proportion
      to that of corn, and, consequently, the great extent of the land which
      they occupied in proportion to what was occupied by corn; and, secondly,
      the low value of this land in proportion to that of corn land, and,
      consequently, the uncultivated and unimproved state of the far greater
      part of the lands of the country. It clearly demonstrates, that the stock
      and population of the country did not bear the same proportion to the
      extent of its territory, which they commonly do in civilized countries;
      and that society was at that time, and in that country, but in its
      infancy. From the high or low money price, either of goods in general, or
      of corn in particular, we can infer only, that the mines, which at that
      time happened to supply the commercial world with gold and silver, were
      fertile or barren, not that the country was rich or poor. But from the
      high or low money price of some sorts of goods in proportion to that of
      others, we can infer, with a degree of probability that approaches almost
      to certainty, that it was rich or poor, that the greater part of its lands
      were improved or unimproved, and that it was either in a more or less
      barbarous state, or in a more or less civilized one.  Any rise in the money price of goods which proceeded altogether from the
      degradation of the value of silver, would affect all sorts of goods
      equally, and raise their price universally, a third, or a fourth, or a
      fifth part higher, according as silver happened to lose a third, or a
      fourth, or a fifth part of its former value. But the rise in the price of
      provisions, which has been the subject of so much reasoning and
      conversation, does not affect all sorts of provisions equally. Taking the
      course of the present century at an average, the price of corn, it is
      acknowledged, even by those who account for this rise by the degradation
      of the value of silver, has risen much less than that of some other sorts
      of provisions. The rise in the price of those other sorts of provisions,
      therefore, cannot be owing altogether to the degradation of the value of
      silver. Some other causes must be taken into the account; and those which
      have been above assigned, will, perhaps, without having recourse to the
      supposed degradation of the value of silver, sufficiently explain this
      rise in those particular sorts of provisions, of which the price has
      actually risen in proportion to that of corn.  As to the price of corn itself, it has, during the sixty-four first years
      of the present century, and before the late extraordinary course of bad
      seasons, been somewhat lower than it was during the sixty-four last years
      of the preceding century. This fact is attested, not only by the accounts
      of Windsor market, but by the public fiars of all the different counties
      of Scotland, and by the accounts of several different markets in France,
      which have been collected with great diligence and fidelity by Mr
      Messance, and by Mr Dupré de St Maur. The evidence is more complete than
      could well have been expected in a matter which is naturally so very
      difficult to be ascertained.  As to the high price of corn during these last ten or twelve years, it can
      be sufficiently accounted for from the badness of the seasons, without
      supposing any degradation in the value of silver.  The opinion, therefore, that silver is continually sinking in its value,
      seems not to be founded upon any good observations, either upon the prices
      of corn, or upon those of other provisions.  The same quantity of silver, it may perhaps be said, will, in the present
      times, even according to the account which has been here given, purchase a
      much smaller quantity of several sorts of provisions than it would have
      done during some part of the last century; and to ascertain whether this
      change be owing to a rise in the value of those goods, or to a fall in the
      value of silver, is only to establish a vain and useless distinction,
      which can be of no sort of service to the man who has only a certain
      quantity of silver to go to market with, or a certain fixed revenue in
      money. I certainly do not pretend that the knowledge of this distinction
      will enable him to buy cheaper. It may not, however, upon that account be
      altogether useless.  It may be of some use to the public, by affording an easy proof of the
      prosperous condition of the country. If the rise in the price of some
      sorts of provisions be owing altogether to a fall in the value of silver,
      it is owing to a circumstance, from which nothing can be inferred but the
      fertility of the American mines. The real wealth of the country, the
      annual produce of its land and labour, may, notwithstanding this
      circumstance, be either gradually declining, as in Portugal and Poland; or
      gradually advancing, as in most other parts of Europe. But if this rise in
      the price of some sorts of provisions be owing to a rise in the real value
      of the land which produces them, to its increased fertility, or, in
      consequence of more extended improvement and good cultivation, to its
      having been rendered fit for producing corn; it is owing to a circumstance
      which indicates, in the clearest manner, the prosperous and advancing
      state of the country. The land constitutes by far the greatest, the most
      important, and the most durable part of the wealth of every extensive
      country. It may surely be of some use, or, at least, it may give some
      satisfaction to the public, to have so decisive a proof of the increasing
      value of by far the greatest, the most important, and the most durable
      part of its wealth.  It may, too, be of some use to the public, in regulating the pecuniary
      reward of some of its inferior servants. If this rise in the price of some
      sorts of provisions be owing to a fall in the value of silver, their
      pecuniary reward, provided it was not too large before, ought certainly to
      be augmented in proportion to the extent of this fall. If it is not
      augmented, their real recompence will evidently be so much diminished. But
      if this rise of price is owing to the increased value, in consequence of
      the improved fertility of the land which produces such provisions, it
      becomes a much nicer matter to judge, either in what proportion any
      pecuniary reward ought to be augmented, or whether it ought to be
      augmented at all. The extension of improvement and cultivation, as it
      necessarily raises more or less, in proportion to the price of corn, that
      of every sort of animal food, so it as necessarily lowers that of, I
      believe, every sort of vegetable food. It raises the price of animal food;
      because a great part of the land which produces it, being rendered fit for
      producing corn, must afford to the landlord anti farmer the rent and
      profit of corn land. It lowers the price of vegetable food; because, by
      increasing the fertility of the land, it increases its abundance. The
      improvements of agriculture, too, introduce many sorts of vegetable food,
      which requiring less land, and not more labour than corn, come much
      cheaper to market. Such are potatoes and maize, or what is called Indian
      corn, the two most important improvements which the agriculture of Europe,
      perhaps, which Europe itself, has received from the great extension of its
      commerce and navigation. Many sorts of vegetable food, besides, which in
      the rude state of agriculture are confined to the kitchen-garden, and
      raised only by the spade, come, in its improved state, to be introduced
      into common fields, and to be raised by the plough; such as turnips,
      carrots, cabbages, etc. If, in the progress of improvement, therefore, the
      real price of one species of food necessarily rises, that of another as
      necessarily falls; and it becomes a matter of more nicety to judge how far
      the rise in the one may be compensated by the fall in the other. When the
      real price of butcher’s meat has once got to its height (which, with
      regard to every sort, except perhaps that of hogs flesh, it seems to have
      done through a great part of England more than a century ago), any rise
      which can afterwards happen in that of any other sort of animal food,
      cannot much affect the circumstances of the inferior ranks of people. The
      circumstances of the poor, through a great part of England, cannot surely
      be so much distressed by any rise in the price of poultry, fish,
      wild-fowl, or venison, as they must be relieved by the fall in that of
      potatoes.  In the present season of scarcity, the high price of corn no doubt
      distresses the poor. But in times of moderate plenty, when corn is at its
      ordinary or average price, the natural rise in the price of any other sort
      of rude produce cannot much affect them. They suffer more, perhaps, by the
      artificial rise which has been occasioned by taxes in the price of some
      manufactured commodities, as of salt, soap, leather, candles, malt, beer,
      ale, etc.  Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon the real Price of
      Manufactures.  It is the natural effect of improvement, however, to diminish gradually
      the real price of almost all manufactures. That of the manufacturing
      workmanship diminishes, perhaps, in all of them without exception. In
      consequence of better machinery, of greater dexterity, and of a more
      proper division and distribution of work, all of which are the natural
      effects of improvement, a much smaller quantity of labour becomes
      requisite for executing any particular piece of work; and though, in
      consequence of the flourishing circumstances of the society, the real
      price of labour should rise very considerably, yet the great diminution of
      the quantity will generally much more than compensate the greatest rise
      which can happen in the price.  There are, indeed, a few manufactures, in which the necessary rise in the
      real price of the rude materials will more than compensate all the
      advantages which improvement can introduce into the execution of the work
      in carpenters’ and joiners’ work, and in the coarser sort of cabinet work,
      the necessary rise in the real price of barren timber, in consequence of
      the improvement of land, will more than compensate all the advantages
      which can be derived from the best machinery, the greatest dexterity, and
      the most proper division and distribution of work.  But in all cases in which the real price of the rude material either does
      not rise at all, or does not rise very much, that of the manufactured
      commodity sinks very considerably.  This diminution of price has, in the course of the present and preceding
      century, been most remarkable in those manufactures of which the materials
      are the coarser metals. A better movement of a watch, than about the
      middle of the last century could have been bought for twenty pounds, may
      now perhaps be had for twenty shillings. In the work of cutlers and
      locksmiths, in all the toys which are made of the coarser metals, and in
      all those goods which are commonly known by the name of Birmingham and
      Sheffield ware, there has been, during the same period, a very great
      reduction of price, though not altogether so great as in watch-work. It
      has, however, been sufficient to astonish the workmen of every other part
      of Europe, who in many cases acknowledge that they can produce no work of
      equal goodness for double or even for triple the price. There are perhaps
      no manufactures, in which the division of labour can be carried further,
      or in which the machinery employed admits of a greater variety of
      improvements, than those of which the materials are the coarser metals.  In the clothing manufacture there has, during the same period, been no
      such sensible reduction of price. The price of superfine cloth, I have
      been assured, on the contrary, has, within these five-and-twenty or thirty
      years, risen somewhat in proportion to its quality, owing, it was said, to
      a considerable rise in the price of the material, which consists
      altogether of Spanish wool. That of the Yorkshire cloth, which is made
      altogether of English wool, is said, indeed, during the course of the
      present century, to have fallen a good deal in proportion to its quality.
      Quality, however, is so very disputable a matter, that I look upon all
      information of this kind as somewhat uncertain. In the clothing
      manufacture, the division of labour is nearly the same now as it was a
      century ago, and the machinery employed is not very different. There may,
      however, have been some small improvements in both, which may have
      occasioned some reduction of price.  But the reduction will appear much more sensible and undeniable, if we
      compare the price of this manufacture in the present times with what it
      was in a much remoter period, towards the end of the fifteenth century,
      when the labour was probably much less subdivided, and the machinery
      employed much more imperfect, than it is at present.  In 1487, being the 4th of Henry VII., it was enacted, that “whosoever
      shall sell by retail a broad yard of the finest scarlet grained, or of
      other grained cloth of the finest making, above sixteen shillings, shall
      forfeit forty shillings for every yard so sold.” Sixteen shillings,
      therefore, containing about the same quantity of silver as four-and-twenty
      shillings of our present money, was, at that time, reckoned not an
      unreasonable price for a yard of the finest cloth; and as this is a
      sumptuary law, such cloth, it is probable, had usually been sold somewhat
      dearer. A guinea may be reckoned the highest price in the present times.
      Even though the quality of the cloths, therefore, should be supposed
      equal, and that of the present times is most probably much superior, yet,
      even upon this supposition, the money price of the finest cloth appears to
      have been considerably reduced since the end of the fifteenth century. But
      its real price has been much more reduced. Six shillings and eightpence
      was then, and long afterwards, reckoned the average price of a quarter of
      wheat. Sixteen shillings, therefore, was the price of two quarters and
      more than three bushels of wheat. Valuing a quarter of wheat in the
      present times at eight-and-twenty shillings, the real price of a yard of
      fine cloth must, in those times, have been equal to at least three pounds
      six shillings and sixpence of our present money. The man who bought it
      must have parted with the command of a quantity of labour and subsistence
      equal to what that sum would purchase in the present times.  The reduction in the real price of the coarse manufacture, though
      considerable, has not been so great as in that of the fine.  In 1463, being the 3rd of Edward IV. it was enacted, that “no servant in
      husbandry nor common labourer, nor servant to any artificer inhabiting out
      of a city or burgh, shall use or wear in their clothing any cloth above
      two shillings the broad yard.” In the 3rd of Edward IV., two shillings
      contained very nearly the same quantity of silver as four of our present
      money. But the Yorkshire cloth which is now sold at four shillings the
      yard, is probably much superior to any that was then made for the wearing
      of the very poorest order of common servants. Even the money price of
      their clothing, therefore, may, in proportion to the quality, be somewhat
      cheaper in the present than it was in those ancient times. The real price
      is certainly a good deal cheaper. Tenpence was then reckoned what is
      called the moderate and reasonable price of a bushel of wheat. Two
      shillings, therefore, was the price of two bushels and near two pecks of
      wheat, which in the present times, at three shillings and sixpence the
      bushel, would be worth eight shillings and ninepence. For a yard of this
      cloth the poor servant must have parted with the power of purchasing a
      quantity of subsistence equal to what eight shillings and ninepence would
      purchase in the present times. This is a sumptuary law, too, restraining
      the luxury and extravagance of the poor. Their clothing, therefore, had
      commonly been much more expensive.  The same order of people are, by the same law, prohibited from wearing
      hose, of which the price should exceed fourteen-pence the pair, equal to
      about eight-and-twenty pence of our present money. But fourteen-pence was
      in those times the price of a bushel and near two pecks of wheat; which in
      the present times, at three and sixpence the bushel, would cost five
      shillings and threepence. We should in the present times consider this as
      a very high price for a pair of stockings to a servant of the poorest and
      lowest order. He must however, in those times, have paid what was really
      equivalent to this price for them.  In the time of Edward IV. the art of knitting stockings was probably not
      known in any part of Europe. Their hose were made of common cloth, which
      may have been one of the causes of their dearness. The first person that
      wore stockings in England is said to have been Queen Elizabeth. She
      received them as a present from the Spanish ambassador.  Both in the coarse and in the fine woollen manufacture, the machinery
      employed was much more imperfect in those ancient, than it is in the
      present times. It has since received three very capital improvements,
      besides, probably, many smaller ones, of which it may be difficult to
      ascertain either the number or the importance. The three capital
      improvements are, first, the exchange of the rock and spindle for the
      spinning-wheel, which, with the same quantity of labour, will perform more
      than double the quantity of work. Secondly, the use of several very
      ingenious machines, which facilitate and abridge, in a still greater
      proportion, the winding of the worsted and woollen yarn, or the proper
      arrangement of the warp and woof before they are put into the loom; an
      operation which, previous to the invention of those machines, must have
      been extremely tedious and troublesome. Thirdly, the employment of the
      fulling-mill for thickening the cloth, instead of treading it in water.
      Neither wind nor water mills of any kind were known in England so early as
      the beginning of the sixteenth century, nor, so far as I know, in any
      other part of Europe north of the Alps. They had been introduced into
      Italy some time before.  The consideration of these circumstances may, perhaps, in some measure,
      explain to us why the real price both of the coarse and of the fine
      manufacture was so much higher in those ancient than it is in the present
      times. It cost a greater quantity of labour to bring the goods to market.
      When they were brought thither, therefore, they must have purchased, or
      exchanged for the price of, a greater quantity.  The coarse manufacture probably was, in those ancient times, carried on in
      England in the same manner as it always has been in countries where arts
      and manufactures are in their infancy. It was probably a household
      manufacture, in which every different part of the work was occasionally
      performed by all the different members of almost every private family, but
      so as to be their work only when they had nothing else to do, and not to
      be the principal business from which any of them derived the greater part
      of their subsistence. The work which is performed in this manner, it has
      already been observed, comes always much cheaper to market than that which
      is the principal or sole fund of the workman’s subsistence. The fine
      manufacture, on the other hand, was not, in those times, carried on in
      England, but in the rich and commercial country of Flanders; and it was
      probably conducted then, in the same manner as now, by people who derived
      the whole, or the principal part of their subsistence from it. It was,
      besides, a foreign manufacture, and must have paid some duty, the ancient
      custom of tonnage and poundage at least, to the king. This duty, indeed,
      would not probably be very great. It was not then the policy of Europe to
      restrain, by high duties, the importation of foreign manufactures, but
      rather to encourage it, in order that merchants might be enabled to
      supply, at as easy a rate as possible, the great men with the
      conveniencies and luxuries which they wanted, and which the industry of
      their own country could not afford them.  The consideration of these circumstances may, perhaps, in some measure
      explain to us why, in those ancient times, the real price of the coarse
      manufacture was, in proportion to that of the fine, so much lower than in
      the present times.  